**Week 05 - Feb 18: The Values Toolkit**  
_Theme: Character - The dog, spilled milk, frozen flashlight_  
**[Chapter Two: Values: Get Some]** As my siblings played in the barnyard on a summer day, the dry summer air seemed to blow in an unknown friendly dog from out of nowhere. She was a hyper pup with long hair, a long nose, and a perpetually happy face. She was no Sheppard, Collie, or Sheepdog of any kind. Clearly not a working dog at all, defiantly nothing like the red healer, Bandit, we had that could bring the cows in from the corral for milking with one “get ‘em”. She was clearly a stray, and clearly a mutt. But when my little brother played the puppy dog eyes on my dad, Dad agreed that we could run an ad in the paper and if no one claimed the thing, Charlie could keep it. When after weeks of asking around and running ads proved fruitless, the promise to keep the pup was honored and Dad gave in. A black end to her all white tail gave her the name Tip, or Tippie, as Aunt Dena Rae called her, and she became part of the family. She wasn’t much for herding cows, in fact Grandpa would often lock her in the granary when livestock needed to be herded, because she would run around and scatter the animals rather than direct them. Even with all the effort to show her what to do, she just wanted to play. But she couldn’t even play fetch, dumb mutt. It didn’t matter; my little brother loved her. Then, one day, Tip was nowhere to be fund. She was not at the barn, not at grandma's house, not in the fields or the pasture, or at the neighbor down the dusty road. She had disappeared as suddenly as she had appeared. Kids cried and prayed. One night about a week after Tip was lost my little brother made an odd request. “Dad,” he pleaded with the same puppy eyes he used to keep the dog in the first place, “will you go get Tippie no matter how far away she is.” “Of course,” the answer came back quickly. For surly, how far away could the little dog be. The very next day the phone rang and my dad answered, "Hello". “Is this Charlie Sparrow?" asked the woman at the other end. "He is at school… This is his father…. May I help you?" relied my dad, unsure why an unfamiliar lady would call for a first grader. "Sir, I am calling from the pound in Winnemucca, Nevada”. (It's a real place. Look it up, I had to.) ”We found a dog with a tag indicating it belongs to a Charlie Sparrow… we are sorry we didn’t call sooner but the fir around the dog’s neck made it so that we hadn’t seen the tags until today.” Now, Winnemucca, NV is a seven hour drive from Weston, ID, one way. As near as my dad could figure, Tip had jumped into the back of Grandpa’s old brown farm truck, as he always did when it pulled out of the yard. Accept, this time it was not Grandpa driving down the lane to feed the calves. Uncle Bob had a tendency to “borrow” things, and this time he borrowed the truck. He must have stopped for gas and the thirsty pup, after a 7 hour ride, must have jumped out for a much needed pit stop. It's hard to say the exact sequence of events, but at this point, what was a guy to do? For one, he could have ignored that call. After all, he was the only one who knew where the dog was. He could have easily told the nice lady on the phone from Winnemucca, ”Ma’am, you just go ahead and take off those tags that say he belongs to Charlie Sparrow and give that hyper, long haired, mutt to some other nice kid”. He could have found a much better dog as a replacement. He could have, but instead, he didn't hesitate, he got in his truck and drove for 14 hours, the rest of the day and late into night, to Winnemucca, Nevada to get it. Mom didn't tell us why dad had not come he for dinner or why we needed to do the milking. It wasn’t uncommon for us to take care of the chores so we did’t ask. I was awakened at some point in the early morning hours as Tip rushed through the house licking faces in beds and checking to see that all kids were accounted for. That dog was queen of the house after that. Even Mom, who was famous in our house for raising her voice only one time that any of us could ever remember, to chastise, "Tip! That will be enough!", even Mom let the dog in the house on cold winter nights in Idaho. She even made him a spot on the carpet of all things. But the real hero was Dad. My father was a man who kept promises. I never liked that dog. My dad certainly didn’t drive to Nevada for me, and I never asked him to. But that day I knew he would. I knew he could be trusted “no matter how far” he had to go. **Leaders who are trusted are leaders who are followed.** _Character is doing the right thing when nobody's looking. There are too many people who think that the only thing that's right is to get by, and the only thing that's wrong is to get caught. ~J.C. Watts_  
We had a small plot of 20 acres behind the house and my grandpa had 40 acres behind his place. With the 30 acres we leased from the neighbors, it kept a boy with some work to do in the summer. My dad worked for the West Cache Canal Company bringing water across the high Southern Idaho step desert to the thirsty sandy fields. It was a bit unpredictable where he might be on a given day but he was always predictably busy through the summer months. In addition, the milk from the dairy was our family’s livelihood. Dad used to say things like, “cow’s don’t care if you’re busy or tired.” “They don’t care if it’s Saturday or a holiday or your birthday.” ”They have to be milked, twice a day, every day.” “There are no days off”. On his busy days my dad would load our bikes in the back of the old white pick up truck and drop my sister and I off at the barn. With the cows milked we would ride the mile and a half back home. At the end of the day, if it didn’t look like dad would make it home for milking, we would ride the bikes back down to the barn to milk the cows again. My dad trusted my sister and me with incredible responsibility for pre-teen adolescence. For the most part we made him proud, but we did have our moments. When we cleaned out the lines after milking we removed the line from the tank to flush a rinse cycle, which we fed to the calves, and then ran the cleaning solution through. At the beginning of each milking the line would be reconnected to the tank. I remember one evening when the milking was entirely completed, I went into the wash room to remove the line from the tank. The line was already removed and I knew immediately by the milk splashed around the drain that it had not been recently removed by my sister. We had literally dumped the entire milking down the drain. My dad was rightfully upset when we called him over the CB radio to let him know what had happened. But I was surprised at how quickly we were forgiven and confidence was restored. It was clearly accidental. He truly trusted us and he needed us. Leaders have a responsibility to remove form their organization individuals who have a habit of doing things that are not beneficial and/or detrimental to the organization. This must be done for two reasons. The first is obvious, replace the person who is not pulling their weight in order to put a more productive person in their stead. The second is maybe less obvious, but actually just as, if not more, important. You have to cut out cancerous, bad strawberries from destroying the moral of the rest of the workers. It can be extremely de-motivating to see someone doing a poor or even mediocre job who receives the same treatment, pay, rewards, etc. as someone who is working much harder. Keeping under performers around brings everyone to that low level of expectation. It is extremely difficult sometimes as a leader not to reward poor performance with indifference and to reward hard work with more work. Standards must be clearly written and disseminated to all. Failure to meet standards must be dealt with in a swift and severe way. However, individuals who make mistakes and work hard to correct and reduce mistakes should be forgiven. This creates an atmosphere of honesty. When mistakes are made, which will happen, it is important to have a climate where it can be confessed wholly and honestly. We as leaders must be willing to admit our own short comings and mistakes as well. Forgiving subordinates fosters forgiveness from them when we make mistakes, which we will do. **Forgive and Fire, both are critical.** In _Chapter 4: When to Mentor, When to Fire_ of a relevant book on leadership titled “The Dichotomy of Leadership”, the former Navy Seal authors, Jocko Willink and Leif Babin, address this challenging dichotomy. They share stories of Seal teammates whom they rallied around to great success. They also share the story of a teammate who they needed and cared about but who ultimately did not meet a standard level of proficiency and was removed from the teams. Things to consider: The initial default should focus on coaching, teaching, mentoring, and counseling. Turn over is costly in so many ways, not the least of which is the time and emotional efforts of reforming teams. Efforts to retain should emphasize an individuals strengths and how they can be utilized effectively. Be conscious not to remove someone from your team simply because you don’t “get along”. Diversity is a valuable asset. Check yourself; are you dismissing this person because they disagree with you? Surrounding yourself with all “Yes” men and women, can be hurting the potential of the organization. On the other hand, I have unfortunately waited to long, on occasion, to let someone go, thinking I was helping the individual, thinking I was helping the team. I later recognized the responsibility of firing was mine alone, as the leader, and I had hurt the team by not taking charge of it. The good news is that if you have done the formal, written counseling and can demonstrate what expectations were and where the individual failed to meet those expectations, if you have clearly communicated the consequences of not meeting objectives, then the firing feels more logical and less threatening to both the one doing the firing and the one leaving. Removing someone from your team does not have to be painful or dramatic. Unless they have done something illegal or un ethical it can simply be an opportunity for them to pursue options that are a better fit for their skills.  
Work on the farm was an everyday affair. As expressed previously, cows had to get milked every day, twice a day, no exceptions. It would be many years later that I would understand that greatness is typically forged, not in one great act, but from meaningful, often monotonous, things done every day. Even great moments and achievements are generally reached by doing mundane things for a long time before the recognition or reward. People don’t just wake up doctors; years of school, days and nights of residency, hours upon hours of study and papers later, the results are ultimately manifest. To be clear, it is critical that those mundane, everyday acts are steps on the path toward the objective. Mount Fuji can be climbed by putting one foot in front of the other, but one foot in front of the other across the kitchen floor to the refrigerator does not get one to the top of Fuji. The key is to **build habits**, to be consistent, but know when to deviate. No I didn’t learn this lesson at 14. Nor can I say with confidence that I get it correct now. But those good habits can be started young and build upon over a lifetime. My dad sold the farm when I was 15, just before I was old enough that he would let me to drive the tractor in the corral. It seemed everything ended just before I was old enough to do it. I had looked forward to riding a motorcycle. Just before I turned 12 and my dad would allow me to ride it, my grandpa sold the bike and bought a four-wheeler. Ok to drive, but not the same. I harbored ill feeling towards my father for a long time for all the things I thought he should have provided me, and for all the wisdom I thought he should have imparted to me. He knew more about cars, and engines, and wielding, and life in general that he didn't teach me. I understand now that he did his best and I love and appreciate him for that. **Holding grudges and blaming others for doing something, or not doing something, is not helpful. Grudges lead only to mistrust and contention.** Ironically the reason for the tension and animosity is rarely even know by those for whom the grudge is held. I held a stupid grudge for years that my sister got to attend my birthday party and I didn’t get to attend hers. When she reads this, it will probably be the first time she would even guess that this happened. I probably wouldn’t have enjoyed her birthday party anyway. But it was the principle of the matter. It seems silly now but the emotions were real and raw and long lasting. Unfortunately, **communication** is not some silver bullet or magic solution to all problems, nor the answer to all leadership challenges, but there is a reason it is included in nearly all leadership courses. It is an important and powerful tool. If you haven’t noticed by now, there are people on this planet, and to be a leader, other people will be involved. Direct communication about desires and concerns will go a long way to mitigate unmet expectations and misunderstandings. My father and I now have a great relationship. I believe this is not attributable to any great event but a significant investment in time and a willingness to listen. I remember one cold winter night looking down into a dark hole, which I believe was the water box at the spring that supplied water to our house. The water running right out of the frozen ground was only not frozen itself because it was in motion. The pump had stopped, probably because of the cold. I stood over the hole looking down at my dad who hung onto a cold aluminum ladder with the inside of his elbow in order to free his hands to work. My job should have been simple, hold the flashlight. But despite the simplicity of the task I was not doing a great job. I was having trouble because I was trying to tell some tall tale that required demonstrating what was happening in the story as much as telling it. My flailing arms were not holding consistent light on the frozen pump. My dad eventually took the light from me to hold under his chin while he continued to work with both hands. I was grateful because my hand was getting cold from holding the light and I was having a hard time making the exaggerated hand motions necessary for the dramatic nature of my story with the flashlight in my hand. At some point -20* F temperature was too much to even stand and flail my arms. I climbed in the truck and cranked up the heat, leaving him alone in the dark frozen hole struggling to get water to his family. Sorry dad. Thanks for listening. Sometimes the best investment you can make is to **listen**. Working summer months for the West Cache Cannel Company required long hours of driving down bumpy dirt roads along the cannel banks regulating the water flow and insuring everyone took their allotted turn . My dad often invited me to join him; which I was glad to do. On such occasions, it was my job to periodically jump out of the truck to open the gates of the farmers along the route. Then after my dad drove the truck through, I would quickly close the gate, jump back in the truck, and we would again be on our way. The time was passed listening to the radio and drinking lemon-aid. Most of the time passed without conversation and most of the conversations we did have were not thought provoking or earth shattering but it left the window open to have important conversations. Your time is valuable but if you don’t give any of that time to work alongside those you lead you will miss out on deeply understanding your subordinates and gaining their trust. **Invest in them your time**. With the cows gone, I felt a need for employment and income. My sister had been hired at the local fast-food place. It seemed logical to apply at the same place. I worked hard and did a good job, but was disappointed that my boss never saw in me the potential for leadership that she saw in others. It turns out that we can’t all be in charge. **Some are ready sooner than others, some are never ready to lead.** **Even hard workers don’t always make good leaders.** Between work and playing in the pep band at all of the high school sporting events from football, basketball, and even a few volleyball games, I loved to be in the school and community plays. My parents gave me great autonomy and freedom to come and go, as long as they knew where I was. My parents supported me in every endeavor. They came to many low budget concerts and tiny productions. At 17, I landed the part of Ralph in the classic "Sound of Music". Ralf was the 17 year old going on 18 getting caught up in the Nazi movement. The part of Liesl, the 16 year old, going on 17, falling in love with Ralph, was played by Cindy, a young lady friend of mine, so beautiful I was afraid to kiss her, even when directed to do so as part of the production. I faked it. I know, we all have regrets. In my lame defense, I had never kissed anyone before, and it felt awkward to do it for the first time with an audience. It seemed even more disingenuous to kiss her as practice for the show. The bottom line, I was a good kid, very naïve, but a good kid. And I didn't get into trouble. I did push my autonomy too far. One night, after a show, Cindy and I hung out behind the theater in the parking lot long after the curtain closed. Before the days of cell phones when a quick "where are you" message could relieve worry. I was oblivious to the concern building in my house because I had not returned home. Suddenly a car pulled into the dark, quiet parking lot. Two headlights shined on us like two thieves caught in the act. My dad pulled up next to us, stepped out, quickly looked at me with tiered upset eyes and said, "Your mom is worried about you." He looked at Cindy and softened his tone a little, but still quite sternly stated "your parents are probably worried about you too." That's all he said. That's all he had to say. It was after 2:00 am. Message received, we quickly said goodbye and went home. **Leaders, give subordinates the freedom to succeed but you still have to care and make corrections when necessary.** **Subordinates, give your leader reason to trust you.**