**PHASE 4: THE PIVOT (Adulthood)**  
**Week 16 - May 6: The Algorithm of Love**  
_Theme: The Checklist for a Wife & Choices_  
[Chapter 4.5: It doesn’t hurt to get lucky: Take advantage of it]  
This is written as an intermediary chapter because the stories and lessons herein are less about leadership and more about life in general. I include it because it's a big part of my story, as is most of the living done by all leaders. I wish that I could profess to have found the balance that so many of us seek. I am convinced that there is no true balance of a single day. Sometimes the short term need to be employed and put food on the table to subsist, takes precedence over the known long term benefits of continued education. Sometimes clambering bosses need to be asked for patience as we tend to an ill family member. Some jobs aren't worth missing every concert for. Sometimes "I'm sorry" is in order because of an unattended game due to a deadline or exam. Sometimes relaxation is out of the question when a neighbor needs help rebuilding their fence after a wind storm. Sometimes all our best efforts are not enough to be there for all the people and the things, all the time. Though the pendulum swings, I affirm that we should live a life of more than just work and more than just entertainment. While we might be out of balance at any one time, it is possible to look back and see evidence, overall, of a balanced, full, and meaningful life. So that's the goal; continue to check the azimuth and strive to keep, overall, all things in perspective.  
For 20 years I've thought at times about the girls I dated, girls I was very fond of, the girls I had a crush on but was too intimidated to ask out. I've thought too of things I should have tried, parties I should have gone to, work I should have done better. Reflection is helpful and a recurring theme of this book but be carful, because the common expression that hindsight is 20/20, is flawed. Foresight is better vision most times. Hind sight tends to be skewed by assuming the outcome of a different choice. Reality is that we don’t know what that outcome would have been and so we imagine the best case scenario. Learning from choices is good, but dwelling on past choices can be crippling. Making deliberate choices, saying out loud, "given the information I have, at this time, this is the best choice I can make". This is particularly critical for me as a Soldier. I have made decisions that ended people’s lives or left them with life-long injuries, pain, and disabilities. I did not make those decisions lightly. At the end of the day I remain confident that I made the best decisions I could have at the time, with the information I had, and in the situation in which I found myself. In a less dramatic way, leader make choices that can effect a person’s livelihood. Making a decision to hire or fire someone is life altering.  
I don’t know that it is possible to live regret free, but making deliberate choices, living with the consequences of those choices, and moving on, is key for leaders and in life.  
When I returned home from two years in Costa Rica most of my friends had moved on. Girls I dated where married. Guys I hung out with were at collage, or working, or both. In addition to a little culture shock, the life train had kept moving down the track and I felt as though I was still standing at the station staring at the ticket counter trying to understand the options. The sign appeared to be in English; I understood the words but I did not understand what it meant. Fortunately for me, another train was about to roll by and I was about to climb on board.  
While I knew eventually I would go to college, I had joined the Army with that stated purpose in mind, serving a mission had been the only thing I really aspired to; the only goal I truly had. And I did it! Boom! But then, I had no idea where to go next. I spent a couple days looking for work near my parent’s house. I pretty quickly received an offer to work at a factory making plastic bags. It was more money than I had made in my whole life to that point, around $8.00/hr. When I interviewed for the job they told me they had a program to help pay for college, which got me very excited. Then, upon closer review of the work schedule, I realized I would be working 9 hour days and not able to go to school during the day. "When will I go to school"? I asked. "You can take night classes, I guess", was not the answer I was looking for, but I didn't know of any other option.  
A few days later, while I was almost resolved that taking a few classes in the evening was what I would have to do, my cousin Diana came to my folk’s house for a visit. Diana was two years my junior and although our families did a lot together when we were younger, the two of us had not been particularly close. She had two brothers closer to my age that I did most things with. (I do have one fond memory of the only trip I made away from the farm in Idaho when my sister and I flew to Texas where Diana and her family lived. Diana and I became fast friends the day we went to Six Flags in Dallas and no one else was as interested as we were in riding all the biggest rollercoasters.) Now my little cousin had a year of college under her belt. What happened? She had not been detoured in life by the Army and a mission, that's what happened.  
So I started asking questions like, ”how do you go to college?” She came back with harder questions like, “where do you want to go to college?” And, “what did you score on your ACT?” The shocking truth came out; I hadn’t taken the ACT. I had a singular focus remember? I didn’t have a vehicle, so Diana drove me down to Utah State University and showed me to the admissions office. Despite living less than 35 minutes away, I had never been to the campus. She helped me apply for financial aid. She somehow convinced the admissions people to conditionally admit me to the University for one semester pending I scored high enough on the ACT and maintained good grades. She helped me set an appointment to take the ACT the very next morning. I took it cold, with no studying, having been out or school for three years. I scored exactly the minimum agreed to score. I was in. I determined then to take a leap of faith to go to school full time and not work that dead end job. I quit before I started.  
People come into our lives that change us for the better. These can be mentors, family members, or strangers. This is one of the greatest rewards and joys in life. The only thing greater is being that person for someone else. I am eternally grateful to Diana for being patient with me through the process and all my questions. But her impact on my life would not end there.  
“We should go on a double date". Diana announced, "You bring down one of your return missionary friends and I will introduce you to one of my friends,” indicating that she had just the friend in mind. Although she was trying hard to act like this was the first time she thought of this great plan, she had obviously been cooking it up for some time. We actually talked about dating a lot. We even gave nicknames to people we knew. The nicknames were shallow indications of our primary attraction to that person such as "runner", "smart girl", and "super cute guy". We had entire conversations about people without mentioning names, “I saw super cute guy today. He’s so cute.” She was a bit boy crazy and clearly in the hunt for Mr. Right. She was ready to marry the right guy, right now, if she could find him. I had just returned from a two year sabbatical from even looking at girls and, although I was certainly ready to date, I had a different outlook than at any other time in my life. I had come up with a list of rules; criteria that a girl had to meet to be a candidate for companionship. #1 on the list for me was spirituality. It was a hard criteria to avoid after spending the entirety of two years with that focus.  
I had few ideas for dates when Diana asked what we wanted to do on this double date. I took a shot in the dark and asked if this girl had a current temple recommend. (In my faith it is necessary to hold an card which amounts to an endorsement from an ecclesiastical leaders in order to enter sacred temples. Holding a recommend can indicate a lot about a person’s commitment to principals. While recommends can be requested by members 12 years and older, for certain parts of the temple, recommends at that time were generally kept current only by members who have served missions and/or were married.) I was pleasantly surprised to find out she had a current temple recommend. She moved way up on my rating scale already.  
On 14 July 2000 I raced in my Silver Dodge Stratus with my buddy Jake to Diana’s house. We pulled up to the front and parked on the street. I jumped out and grabbed my white shirt and tie. I still needed to change and I was already late. As I rushed to the door Diana came out and greeted me. Behind her was a beautiful girl in a dark blue dress with light blue flowers. I said a quick hello, introduced Jake to Diana, then pushed past to get in the house and quickly changed. I figured there would be plenty of time for pleasantries once we were on our way. She’s cute I thought, as I changed. Rule #2: The girl I marry must be good looking, I don’t want to sound like a pig, hopefully putting spirituality at the top of the list helps, but if I was going to wake up every morning for the rest of my life to the same face, it needed to be a pretty face. If I was going to kiss the same girl every day after work for years to come I wanted to kiss an attractive girl. I actually debated with myself as I changed my clothes that day, "Is it shallow of me to make that the second rule?... Shallow or not, it didn't matter, I would marry someone attractive. No ugly girl for me. And this date was setting a standard." I opened her door, jumped in, and we were off.  
We talked as I drove. She worked full time in the mortgage division at First Security Bank (later bought out by Wells Fargo) while attending Weber State University full time in the evenings. Impressive! Rule #3 the woman I married must be a woman, not an older woman per say, but someone mature and ambitious. She must have goals and be working to obtain them, whatever they were. She must be professional and able to carry on an adult conversation.  
Just then, we passed the hairiest guy I have ever seen. He rode a rumbling motorcycle with monkey handle bars. He wore a black tank-top barely visible through the hair that was spilling out of every opening. The amount of shoulder hair blowing in the breeze was particularly impressive. We laugh about that guy’s hairy shoulders to this day.  
After the temple we went to "Stinky" Ream’s grocery store, a place none of us were too familiar with, to play a shopping race game. Each team was given an identical list of items to find and put in their team’s shopping cart. Team members had to remain with their partners though out the search. The first couple to place every item on the list in their respective carts and cross the finish line would be declared the supreme allied winner of the universe. Diana and Jake didn’t have a chance. We were off like a shot. Who in the world knows what cheese cloth is anyway? Much less where to find it; Paige, apparently. In order to give them a chance at redemption we raced to put the items back on the shelves where we found them. I figured our opponents would have a fighting chance sense they had just taken the items from the locations they would be putting the back to. I was wrong. We blew them out of the water. Cheesy, I know, but we had a good time. Rule #4 the woman I marry must be able to laugh and have fun. I play to win and we won, thanks to Paige. For my part, I just ran fast and pushed the cart. Which i’m sure is some kind of metaphor for my contribution to the partnership beyond that day as well.  
Paige asked if we could stop by her house to check on her brother. She explained that he has Down’s Syndrome and with her out of the house, he would likely be home alone, which had the potential to lead to mischief. Rule #5: The woman I marry must love and take care of family (I later added to that rule that she must want children, love children, and know how to take care of them). So I met Reese. At barley 5 feet tall he was almost as big around as he was tall. He smiled with his head cocked to one side, gave me a big hug, and said “I like you”. I wasn’t sure how to respond. “I like you, too.” I said. “Can I ask you one couple questions?” he asked. “Sure’” I replied. Paige gave me a look that said, “There is noo telling what he will ask"  
“Ok, here goes”, he said, looking at his sister with a devilish grin. “Are you going to get married with my sister?” It was little embarrassing, but I managed to mutter something about it being our first date and that I couldn’t say for sure. He smiled, “just askin”.  
Paige’s parents were home and her dad stepped in to continue the interrogation. He was kind and fatherly, asking less uncomfortable questions like "where did you go on a mission?" and "What are your plans now?", sparing me the third degree. Her mother entered, and we chatted a bit. She was cheerful and pleasant as well. Rule #6: I must get along with her family (I later added she must get along with my family). This one was huge for me. I knew lots of great couples who struggled because of fights about, or dealings with, lousy families.  
By this time I was starving. We headed back to Diana’s house to cook hamburgers. The deck was dark, the meat was frozen, I was unfamiliar with the grill. I’m embarrassed to admit that in 21 years of life I had apparently not managed to learn how to properly grill a hamburger. I counted on Jake to do the cooking. It took forever. Did I mention I was starving? It was finally announced to be done, it tasted terrible it was raw and nasty. Paige didn't complain, maybe commented that it was not completely cooked, but did not complain. (Knowing now how disgusting this is to her, makes that even more impressive.) Rule #7 the woman I marry must be able the keep a good attitude, even when things don't go well. She must be able to deal well in difficult situations.  
We tried to move on with the date after our late disaster of a meal by playing a game. We again crushed the competition. At one point I literally drew a single line while playing Pictionary and she guessed “telephone pole” the correct answer. Rule #8 The woman I marry must get along with me. (I later solidified this to say that she must love me. I later again added that I must love her. Maybe that’s obvious to most readers but if you’ve read to this point you are acutely aware of what a slow learner I am.  
I would later learn that she hadn't wanted to go out with me in the first place. She had come on the date fully prepared with all sorts of excuses for why she would have to end our date early. She didn’t use any that night. It was well past 1:30 the next morning before we decided to call it a night.  
The next March we were married.  
Set priorities. Be bold in going after them. Be thoughtful, even prayerful, but not reluctant in making decisions. Your priorities certainly will not be the same as mine. I do not pretend this is a comprehensive or maybe even that insightful of a list. Sometimes I wonder if I should have added more things to my list or made sure the person I married was truly the right one for me. I travel a ton and I'm adventurous, Paige, not as much. Should adventurous have been a criteria? I wonder if her husband not traveling half way around the world for months at a time and leaving her home with four kids and projects left undone around the house was on her list, because I'm sure I'm not even filling the things on her short list. In the end I think two people who are truly committed to each other can make it work.  
_Theme: 9/11, ROTC, & Black Swan Events_  
[Chapter 4.5: Part 2]  
"What kind of made up ridiculous rank is that?" I asked my buddy Matt Young when I returned to military duty. He wore a solid black circle on his collar where his rank should be. "I'm a Cadet," he declared proudly. "What the heck is that"? I shrugged. "I'm in the ROTC at Utah State.” My blank stare must have been enough of a clue that his acronym didn’t help me understand any better. He continued, “They‘re paying for me to go to school." I leaned in closer to him and pretended to whisper, "I'm going to Utah State too. They’re giving all of us money for college. I’m pretty sure that's why we're all here." I winked dramatically. "No, It's more than that". He insisted, "I'm on a scholarship, I get a stipend, I'm going to commission as an officer when I graduate." "Wait" I cut him off. I didn't know what a stipend was nor fully appreciate what commissioning meant, but I did understand what scholarship meant. "You mean they are giving you MORE money for doing basically what I'm already doing?" I asked skeptically. "Well you have to take a class, and there's PT (physical fitness), and a leadership lab," He responded. "So basically, no?" I asked. He shook his head. ”I guess, not really." "Well, where do I sign up?" I gestured, signing in the air. I didn’t know anything about ROTC, but I was already in the Army and I was already going to college. They wanted to give me more money and make me an officer; It sounded like a no brainer to me. Paige was not as convinced. We had been married only a few months. She was not thrilled about me being in the Army at all. "Look." I assured her, "I go camping with my Army buddies one weekend a month, they pay me good money to do it, and they are going to give me money for school. I'm in the Army Reserve. If I have to go somewhere, it's World War III and everyone is getting drafted anyway. I might as well be trained to know what I'm doing." That was my literal argument. There was no sign on my horizon, at that time, that I would ever be in harm's way or ever have to be away from her for longer than a two week field problem. August 24th, 2001, I contracted with the ROTC program. The events just a few weeks later of September 11th 2001, would change everything. It would lead to me being home less than three out of the six years after college graduation. This choice to join the ROTC would change the lives of me and my family forever.  
Life is unpredictable, Take advantage of opportunities knowing that it may not turn out the way you anticipated.  
So this was it, we were going to war. The mission of the 854th Quartermaster Company, that I belonged to, was to provide fuel, water, and maintenance support to combat forces. By October 2001 Operation Enduring Freedom had begun; US and other nation’s forces were already on the ground fighting Al-Qaeda suspected to be behind the World Trade Center attacks and their Taliban supporters. Soon there would also be helicopters in the air providing transportation and air support. Those helicopters would need fuel, and an Army Reserve unit would distribute that fuel. That unit was us; or, them at least. When I presented myself for deployment I was hit with this response, ”You ain’t goin anywhere, Cadet!” ”We’re not going?” I asked confused. ”no, we’re going, You’re not going” That didn’t help. He continued. “See this contract? Read right here. You agreed to finish a bachelors degree, Cadet. It’s in your contract. You are non-deployable, Cadet. This fight will be long over by the time you’re done with school.” The multiple references to my status as a Cadet sunk in. A mix of emotions hit me. On one hand, I had trained for years for just this moment. I was no quitter, no coward. I couldn’t help feeling like I was abandoning my team. On the other hand, I felt somewhat relieved not to be going on such an uncertain assignment. Paige, only had one emotion, relief. She cried. She never wanted to marry someone in the military in the first place. When we first met she told me that my status in the Army was a deal breaker. It was our first date, but she was clear it wouldn’t go farther. I had made the same argument I used to convince her that the ROTC was a good idea, ”I go camping with my Army buddies on weekend a month. It’s not like I’m on active duty anyway. Besides, I’m in the Army Reserve, if I’m called up it’s World War III and they will institute the draft again and we’re all going. At least this way I would some training about what to do.” I had believed it. And it was significantly compelling as to convince Paige, She married me after-all, but she made it a point to frequently express that she was still uneasy about the Army. She had been unsettled about my joining the ROTC too. The fact that my contract with the ROTC kept me from deploying helped but not much. She didn’t like it one bit.  
Erik, on the other hand, my battle buddy who had got me through high school, who unintentionally convinced me to join the Army, who gave me great advice as a new missionary, he deployed, and I stayed home.  
Of course the war was not over before I graduated. Few would have predicted it would last 20 years. Fewer were the predictions of how it would end with us haphazardly leaving.  
Not only are our own lives unpredictable the world stage is as unpredictable. Which only further emphasizes the absolute need to take advantages of opportunities but be aware that it may not turn out the way you anticipated.  
"We'll take Dan and you can have all the rest" Dan, the kid picked last, was apparently infinitely more valuable than the other three of us standing there looking around hoping we could play. We didn't even get called out by name, simply referred to as "all the rest". The choosing captain preferred to have us three burdens on the opposing team. The other captain shrugged, uncertain that a man power advantage was worth the liability we posed to his team, but agreed, consigned that if we didn't get in the way to much we could basically watch from on the pitch. People joke about being picked last for teams. As a kid, I would have loved to be picked last; that would mean I was picked by name at all. Once in a while I got to play by being unselected by the choosing side as an offering to the opposing team, as described above.  
Saying I was small and uncoordinated compared to my peers is a major understatement to how physically awkward I was. I wrote in my journal at the end of my sophomore year in high school, "I’ve grown 4 inches, I’m 5’4.” I would grow 7 inches taller in the course of the summer over the next few months. Then I truly was uncoordinated; barely able to figure out how to step over my own, newly enormous feet with my skinny legs. When I signed up for ROTC the Fall of 2001, I learned that the ROTC fielded a team for the Ranger Challenge Competition. Events included a physical fitness test (two minutes of as many push-up, followed by two minutes of as many sit-ups as one could muster, then a two mile run), an obstacle course, a one rope bridge, a land navigation course, and night land navigation course, and several mystery events that could include, first aid, radio communication, shooting, or any other Soldier skills, but would defiantly be physically taxing, all culminating in a 10 kilometer race with full gear and packs. I trained with the team, but made it clear that I wasn't trying to be on the team but was only there to get in shape. As the competition neared, the Captain of the team approached me, "We need you on the team", he said sincerely. I resisted. "You just need an alternate if someone gets hurt. I'm not that good". I protested. "We have an alternate." he insisted "We need you ON the team." I was shocked. I had never felt needed as part of a team before.  
We won the one rope bridge competition with a record time and held our own against other much bigger programs through every event. I was strong and our team was awesome.  
Despite success and demonstrated capability, I continued to compare myself against the most charismatic, the brightest, the strongest, and the fastest. I never quite measured up.  
While humility is a hugely important quality in a leader (more on that later) confidence is equally important. And while comparing ourselves to our peers and aspiring for greatness is good, contentedness, recognition, and gratitude for what we have are equally necessary.  
You are capable of so much more than you think you are.  
A note to caveat this story. This was not an "all good news" event. My new bride was not thrilled that I was spending so much time with my Army buddies, doing “extra-curricular”, ”un-required”, ”goofing off”, things. Worse, I left her at home as I traveled to compete. I mention this here as a reference to previous lessons about regrets and balance. I don't regret the decision I made to participate, I feel that personally, on the whole, I have made the effort to balance competing priorities, BUT, I want to emphasize that what is good for you is not always what is good for everyone. Balance and understanding are required by all sides. Sometimes others make enormous sacrifices for us to be leaders; we should recognize them for that and also sacrifice at times for others to fulfill their commitments and passions.