**Chapter Zero: In The Beginning (After the introduction but not quite to chapter one.)**  
My great grandfather’s father immigrated to the United States from Australia in the late 1800s. His father migrated to Australia from England in an era when most people from England associated Australia with criminals. I continue to search for the reasons he made that voyage. What I do know is that his descendants, my grandfather and his father, were tough men. During the great depression of the 1930s, when despair and tragedy crippled the nation, my great-grandfather, Charles Sparrow, was not selling, he was buying. He acquired a significant stretch of ground in an arid valley in South Eastern Idaho; which he cleared of sagebrush and rocks with the help of good horses and four sons. In the 1940s, when his other sons received agricultural deferments to stay out of the war, one boy, my grandfather, Raymond Sparrow, did not defer and was drafted into the Army. Privet Sparrow was in France guarding prisoners of war when, in an escape attempt, one of the prisoners shanked him in the abdomen with a jagged piece of metal. While recovering aboard a hospital ship, Army leaders discovered that this Idaho farm kid could weld. He then spent the rest of the war welding ships. He returned home with little fanfare; to a family farm where brothers had already staked claims. Rather than cause contention, he sought employment elsewhere. There were plenty of infrastructure projects in those days and his skills as a welder would serve him well. My aunt, in later years, presented me with parts of his Army uniform including his “Eisenhower“ jacket; which I consider today to be one of my prizest possessions. I never asked Grandpa Sparrow about his time in WWII. I never asked him much about anything, despite working side by side with him almost daily on the farm growing up. What I relayed here I know only from the little my dad shared with me after my grandfather passed away.  
I pause from story-telling at this point to impart some of the little wisdom I have, as I will do throughout the book. The second “to do” (the first being to look for the extraordinary in the ordinary and tell your own story, suggested in the introduction) is to ==find out who you are, and where you came from.== I know it’s not earth shattering advice and most readers will determine by now whether to read on or add this to the stack of books they started to read but never "got into". Also, probably already obvious, I have a lot of learning to do myself; as I don’t know why my third-great-grandfather went to Australia in the first place. But truth is true, regardless of who it comes from and how simple it might be. The power of self-reflection does not cease to amaze me. Knowing who you are helps establish a starting point. It provides a lens through which to look out into the future and determine where it is you want to be. Many self-help and leadership books start here; with creating a vision. I agree that knowing where you are going is invaluable. I add, it starts with understanding where you are. And where you are, starts with knowing where you came from. Your personal back story, even your set-backs, are all part of the set-up for who you can become. (Micheal Jr.) The first lesson, spoiler alert, is tied inseparably to the last. If you understand the power of the past you also understand the power you can have on the future; the power of leaving a legacy.  
I illustrate by sharing some of the legacy of my grandpa Raymond’s bride, my Grandma, MarDene Sparrow. She sang with an amazing soprano voice. I loved to hear her sing in the church choir. She knew the words to all the hymns and didn't have to be seated on the choir benches to be heard over the congregation. She was a woman of conviction; her devotion evident as she sang praises. Grandma Sparrow left a legacy of combining these two ideas of; finding motivational stories in everyday life and remembering the stories of the past.  
In her own words, the following is the story of Chub and Jack (Punctuation and grammar are deliberately not corrected.)  
In his later years Daddy had a saying above his desk, “Every man in his lifetime is entitled to one good wife, one good horse and one good dog.” Daddy had each of these in his life and each could be the subject for many stories and experiences. Humorous, serious, faith promoting or character building. My subject for this story is Daddy's team, Cub and Jack. They are a legend in our family.  
When the folks were first married they bought a piece of land at the mouth of Mink Creek. It was 60 acres with a good water right. Much of it was covered with sage brush and willow, Daddy, with the help of this choice team of horses set to work to move a little two room house to the property and then to clear the land. Chub and Jack were well matched, and they were obedient. Daddy described them as being, "a good honest team". He said they worked together and he never asked them to pull but what they gave him all they had.  
It was the custom for the men to get their winter wood out of Strawberry Canyon. Several men would go together, taking their teams and helping each other. One day while they were cutting and loading their logs, a snow slide came down the mountain and blocked the road. When the men began their return home some had gone ahead of Dad. They came to the slide and each tried to go through it but their teams balked. Not one could get his team to pull through the slide. Then they said ",We'll wait for Bill, his team will pull through." Sure enough Chub and Jack PULLED THROUGH. Equal to the faith Daddy had in them. They gave the task all they had, and working together, being obedient to their beloved master, they pulled through the snow slide. Then the other teams could follow for the trail was broke.  
You know, a team can be a couple, a family, or a group of people any size, with a common purpose or goal. We can pull through the snow slides of life if we are obedient to the master, work together as a team, and give the effort all we've got.  
I want to be like Chub and Jack, I want to be like Daddys team. I want to "pull through" any problem, any snow slide that might block my road. I want to Pull through with my testimony still firm, my faith and love for my Savior still strong. I know the Lord loves me and he expects me to PULL THROUGH.  
After telling that story one critic muttered, "cool, a feel good story about horses, I don't have horses for ancestors and I don't relate to your Christian overtone" To which I respond  
"This story is about who **I** am because of where **I** came from and sets the stage for where **I am** going. Take this invitation and find out where **you** came from, who **you** are, and where **you** are going.” In addition, some principles are universal and can be internalized for our benefit regardless of whether they happened to unrelated people or even animals, such as hard work, overcoming obstacles, trust, and teamwork.  
My grandma died of breast cancer while I was at Army Basic Combat Training. She remained strong and kind to the end, always serving her family and her community. I miss her dearly. I never met anyone who loved their birthday as much as she did. April 16th will forever be celebrated in my house in honor of her legacy.  
"And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children and the heart of the children to the fathers…”  
-Malachi 4:6
 
The legend of Chub and Jack runs deeper than the solitary conquering of a snow bank. While assisting with the construction of the twin lakes canal, the entrance to a tunnel collapsed, trapping Jack inside. Grandpa Hansen rushed to breach a hole through which he passed food and water for weeks while men and horses cleared dirt and rocks to reopen the tunnel and free the trapped animal. Jack was eventually rescued from the tomb where he was nearly buried alive but not without lasting effects. The weeks in near pitch black darkness left him ultra sensitive to light and nearly blind. He relied heavily on the commands of his handler and the feeling of the teammate next to him to know where to walk and when to pull. Chub remained a loyal companion, guiding him around the yard to avoid obstacles, to food, and to water. And Jack didn’t quit. Despite his disability he remained useful, helpful, and strong.
 
My connection to this tale is deeply personal, as I face my own challenges and rely heavily on my teammates to, some times, literally guide me through. I will spare the details at this point because some are yet to raw to share, but challenge you to derive your own interpretation and meaning from the story, if you haven’t already. The lessons from these two are endless and legendary   ==Yours if you want it==
 
==Michael Write Jr, or simply "Michael Jr", is a comedian who, in his routine and in his book "Funny How Life Works", describes what he considers to be the process of comedy. He explains that comedy often starts by giving some background, which is called the set-up, then the comedian changes the ending in an unpredictable way, which becomes the punch line. Michael Jr. often shares that part of his “set up” was his struggle with reading at an early age. In order to compensate, he learned to identify words by observing the context in unique ways. He attributes that ability to see things from a unique perspective to his ability to write and perform comedy for a living. Micheal proposes that life is similar to comedy. He suggests that we all use our background and our developed talents, called our set-up, and even our challenging life experiences and disabilities, referred to as our "set-backs", to develop our own purpose, or in other words our own punchline. For him, that punchline is to deliver an opportunity to laugh. He further proposes that our best punchline will be when use our setup in a surprisingly helpful way. I agree. All of our backstory contributes to who we are and helps us shape who we become. It all counts! What is your punchline? Go find it!.==

Possible additions  
Research study that found the strongest correlation of kids with high self esteem is that they know information about their ancestors.
 
David Goggins on the importance of being ok with where you come from.
 
Even a dark past and an unfortunate legacy can be a powerful source of self.
 
BYU probably has some really cool stuff on this I've never heard of.