**Chapter Eleven: Leaders Care**  
I stopped into the tactical operation center (TOC) to get a final intel update from the S2 and an operational update from the S3 before stepping off on our patrol. The TOC was really not much more than a giant dome tent. The surge of forces in Iraq in 2007 was made possible by extending the rotation time for the units already in theater and expediting the mobilization of deploying units, thus the overlap effectively created a flood of forces all at once. Incidentally the units who were weeks or in some cases days away from going home, after a year of combat were not happy with the idea of staying around. Many of them were angry dudes. The infrastructure built up to support a steady state of forces rotating in and out strained under the stress of such an influx. All of the hardstand structures available were occupied by remaining units and the 1-30th, as the new kids on the block, set up their tents where they could push out the perimeter walls and find space.  
I was just wrapping up with the S3 when ==LTC Adgie,== the 1-30th "Battle Boar" commander, emerged trough the zipper and Velcro tent flap. "Wolf, what are you in for?" he asked jovially, filling the tent with his dominating figure and deep gruff voice. I showed him my CONOP (concept of operation), map, and route plan. "We have a mission, Sir" I replied crisp and cheerful. His kind but matter-of-fact nature was contagious. "What time do they SP (start point)?" He asked, turning away from me and addressing his operations officer. "They leave in about an hour, Sir." LTC Adgie's large eyebrows and broad forehead furrowed "They'll miss the patch ceremony?" he stated more than questioned. "Can we push back the mission a few hours?" He directed more than asked. "Roger, Sir. They are clearing in support of our operations. So that would mean we have to shift everything to the right." LTC Adgie in one nod said, ”Why isn’t it already done?”, then he turned again to me. "At ten hundred hours is our patch ceremony. We'll see you and your platoon there." "Yes, Sir" was all I could say to his back as he ducted through a tent flap and into another room in the connected tent maze. There was no need for explanation, no room for rebuttal. "Be there, lined up, at least 30 minutes early to rehearse" the S3 admonished me, as we found ourselves alone again. I looked at him quizzically with a look that asked "really 30 mins early just to stand around". He gave a look back that confirmed, "the boss runs a tight ship. He invited you as a member of the family, don't blow it." he turned back to a computer screen, "Your SP will be one hour from the completion of the ceremony." He stated with his back to me.  
Unit patches, officially called Shoulder Sleeve Insignia, are worn on a Soldiers left sleeve to denote unit assignment. Soldiers who deploy to a designated combat zones for 30 days or longer are authorized to wear the shoulder sleeve insignia of the unit they deploy with, on the right sleeve, known as a Combat Patch. Effectively what LTC Adgie had done, was to designate us as part of his team. The paperwork that would follow would authorize my platoon to wear the 3rd infantry division combat patch on our right shoulder for the duration of our career and have it permanently in our record. This put us in the ranks with Audie Murphy, the most highly decorated American who was a "Dog Faced" Soldier. Along with the other heroes of the 3rd ID, the only US Army Division to fight the Axis powers on all European fronts during WWII.  
I walked back to our tents, cramped and already stifling hot, even though the summer sun had only risen from the dust a few hours before. "Huddle up," I called out as I came around a Texas barrier and into view of the platoon. No one was surprised. They all expected an update when I returned from the TOC. I looked around as they gathered. There were clearly people missing. "Bring in everybody" I clarified, "whether on this mission or not." "Howser's at the motor pool getting my truck ready" Hale declared with a "that ain’t going to happen" air. "I'll fill him in." He offered as a concession. Brummett, Young, and Heddlesten all responded similarly, with Soldiers spread out conducting various tasks getting ready for the mission that I was about to tell them was postponed. "Fine, let me put out some things to who we've got.“ I took a breath knowing there would be backlash. ”The mission is pushed back until after the patch ceremony." already the tension began to mount. "Routes aren't going to get cleared and Soldiers are going to be put in danger so they can do some dumb ceremony!? That's stupid." Hale declared. Others agreed. "Hold on", I tried to salvage this. "All operations are pushed back, so no one will move until we do, and we are invited to the ceremony." "That's worse, we're all invited to stand together and wait for a mortar to land in the middle of us and kill half a battalion!? No thanks. I don't need to watch them get a patch. We're not doing it." The look on my face must have given somethings away "L-T, tell me you didn't volunteer us to be there?" This was not going well. "Listen," I continued "I just watched LTC Adgie, the BN Commander, direct the S3 to push back every operation so that he could put his 3rd infantry division patch on your shoulder. That means something. No other unit has done that for us. This is a small token of appreciation for what we do. We will all be there.“ I looked at SSG Hale, ”Everyone” I paused, "line up outside the TOC at 0930." Then I walked away before anyone could rebuttal. I didn't often make demands but this was one thing I felt strongly about. I respected my team for a mission first attitude and a distain for all things garrison related in a combat zone, it's one of the things that made us great. But there were times to pause for recognition, and this was one of them. Whether they would admit it our not, there was pride in there eyes as we put on the broken tv screen patch of the dog face Soldiers.  
After 48 missions in 45 days we stood in formation again. LTC Adgie personally pinned medals on the chest of most of the Misfit Soldiers. Those 45 days where some of the hardest fought days we experienced. Our team had risked our lives to clear the way, a safer path for others to follow. A tiny bit of ribbon isn't much, but it meant the world to us that someone noticed.  
==Recognition goes a long way. “It’s amazing what a man will do for a piece of colored ribbon (-Attributed to Napoleon Bonaparte)==  
We left FOB Falcon tired but with heads high, and headed toward FOB Stryker for a short pitstop on the way home, well, home being Camp Ramadi. I could not help reflecting on the last two months. In June of 2007 my platoon had been selected from the nine platoons in the Battalion to go to Bagdad and assist with the troop surge. Our mission had not been entirely clear. I knew we were going East, but that was all I knew. Our first Sergeant, was concerned about how we would be received in Bagdad. He demanded that on the day we left we all line up while he inspected everyone to ensure they had on all their protective gear. The day arrived with all the scrambling and coordination to get a platoon ready for a trip across the country to an area we knew nothing about. First Sergeant came out for his inspection. He was disappointed to see that not everyone had on the gear he required of them. It mattered not that we would miss our scheduled departure time and not arrive until late into the night. He sent us to get all of our gear and put it on which, embarrassingly, took several hours.  
==I pause here to make two observations: One, enforcement of standards is an extremely important principal, particularly in the military. I respect the First Sergeant and his enforcement of standards at that moment. However there is a dichotomy, which Jocko Willink better addresses in his book "The Dichotomy of Leadership", that standards have to be balanced with flexibility.==  
==As addressed in the risk chapter, leaders must be certain that in our attempt to enforce standards we are not causing the very thing we are trying to prevent.== ==Like when the zealous Zeng meets his destiny on his way to avoid it, providing Tai Lung the ability to escape in his very attempt to verify that he could not escape.(yes that is a Kung Fu Panda reference==)  
The other reason I mention it is to simply explain why we arrived so late and frustrated with where we had just come from.  
We arrived in the early hours of the morning, tired of traveling, tired of trying to find our way, just plain tired. As we pulled into a large gravel parking lot, not sure where to go, we saw the iconic red castle, symbol of Army Engineers, a welcome sight. A company First Sergeant in the 875th Engineer Battalion from Arkansas welcomed us almost immediately, as if he had waited a long time to greet us. He showed us the way to the motor pool and to our tent. He brought out boxes of Pop Tarts and bottles of Gatorade apologizing that he had so little to give just then, pointing out the chow hall and the dining hours. Dry sugary pastries and warm salty electrolytes never tasted so good. We were stunned and not accustomed to being treated with such hospitality. After a couple hours of rest I made my way to the motor pool. Soldiers for my platoon Were already up and working. I’m sure some of them hadn’t slept. They ran up to me with the biggest grins. "Sir, you know those lights we’ve been trying to get for the whole time we’ve been in Iraq." "yah’, I nodded, confused. "These guys are putting them on our trucks." They nearly skipped back to the motor pool with me like giddy school girls. I soon saw why. "How did you find anything without good lights?" A mechanic asked rhetorically, shaking his head at me as I watched him and his team crawling all over our trucks like skilled spider monkeys, upgrading alternators, changing wiring, and replacing hydraulics. I thanked him genuinely. He apologized that they couldn't do more.  
From there, I made my way to the 875th Tactical Operations Center, an unremarkable building filled with remarkable people. I met the Battalion Commander, ==LTC Anslow,== a short, fiery, lady with a brilliant mind and a friendly smile who reminded me of my mother, tough but caring. For the next month and a half the 875th took care of everything we requested of them and treated us like family. I had never been to Arkansas but when LTC Anslow handed me a Razor Back patch as we left and wished us well, I removed the patch from my own unit and replaced it with hers. (I carry that patch in my uniform pocket to this day to remember the power of a caring leader.)  
We returned to Ramadi triumphantly, still on a bit of an adrenaline rush from a dangerous mission, still on a high from the awards and accolades we just received from strangers turned family, excited to be back with our unit. A few Soldiers came out to greet us, including our company commander MAJ T and First Sergeant. As the Battalion commander and Operations Officer passed by it became immediately obvious that it was a chance passing. "I expect a full report from you," was the only thing he said too me as he passed, before turning to the operations officer and directing "Let's go". As they moved out in the direction of the chow hall the contrast between these and the leaders I just left could not have been more stark.  
I rapped sharply on the Battalion Commander's door prepared with mission statistics to back brief our time away from the flagpole. I wore on my right shoulder the patch of the third infantry division. On my left sleeve I sported the diamond shaped patch with the razor back symbol of the Arkansas National Guard. He noticed immediately. "Take that patch off of him." he angrily directed the Command Sergeant Major who was already in his office when I approached and standing directly to my left across the desk from the commander. The Command Sergeant Major shook his head at me disappointed and ripped the patch off my sleeve with dramatic effect visually and aurally with the sound of the Velcro tearing away. "And I want to see orders authorizing that patch." he glared at the other sleeve. I extended my hand with the paper already highlighted, prepared for the encounter. He didn't even glace at it and refused to take it. The report was over before it started. He was already obviously involved in a conversation with the Command Sergeant Major before I showed up to be a nuisance. I got a lecture about how I worked for him, and whatever vacation I had taken was over, and I could get out of his office. It had been an unnecessary provoking stunt. I wore the patches as a statement and I got the reaction I was looking for. I was fortunate not to be reprimanded more severely.
 
==But I felt justified. ”Vacation”? Yup, I had just been chillin’ at the beach in my board shorts. I’m still a little too bitter to flesh out the point of my thoughts. This particular commander had been an expert in all things Army Engineer before the current conflict but many things had changed. I and my fellow platoon leaders, we were the experts. We had been to the Clearance courses and we had the experience of living it outside the wire every day. I think he was a little intimidated by that (side note don’t be concerned if you are a leader of people who know more than you, that’s a good thing you have a different role as leader let them be the experts.)==  
==bottom line On this one, caring goes a long way.==