**Week 26 - Jul 15: The Servant Commander**  
_Theme: MAJ Trofinoff: Providing "Top Cover."_  
[Chapter Six: Part 3]  
MAJ Trofinoff was taking over with less than a week of training left before we deployed. It's hard to express how epic the impact of that type of change can be. Fortunately for B Company, an entire book could be written alone about the lessons of good leadership I learned from him. Two things stand out.  
#1 MAJ Trofinoff exemplified what I later came to understand as servant leadership. A concept that the leader is, in-fact, a servant to those he/she leads. The leader provides clear vision and intent, and ensures subordinates have the resources, including skills and knowledge, they need to accomplish the mission. As part of that, good leaders I've known, also provide a shield from unnecessary drama coming from higher. They create a buffer or "top cover", absorbing the impact of reprimands for faults while side-stepping praise in order to give credit to the team. They act as a filter, distilling out the noise in order to communicate the important elements mandated from higher and requests for recourses from lower. This is a difficult balancing act. Filter to much and critical information is lost; don't filter enough and information is purely data and not actionable intelligence.  
#2 MAJ T. has provided support to the Soldiers who served with him and their families far beyond the timeline of his tenure. He continues to mentor, inspire, and simply reach out to people. He truly cares. This is not a requirement but I guess that's what makes him a remarkable and not simply a good leader.  
Our memories continue to be formed even after an event and can even be influenced by later experiences. A leader who continues to positively engage periodically after his or her tenure can impact their legacy.