**HIGH GROUND ODYSSEY: SEASON 1 (PART 3)**  
**PHASE 7: COMBAT (The Crucible)**  
**Week 30 - Aug 12: The Ravioli Speed Bump**  
_Theme: First Contact & Stress Inoculation_  
[Chapter Seven: Risk assessment and risk reduction: not risk aversion]  
Despite all the years of training, months of planning, and weeks of traveling, one can never be fully prepared for the experience of combat. Even for those who have deployed and experienced similar environments before, there is no better lesson than being “on the ground”, and there are no better instructors than the people who carried out the mission for the past year. This changing of the guards is known as a relief in place (RIP). A critical element to the RIP is a right seat/left seat ride. In American automobiles, the steering wheel is on the left side, and so it follows that the individual driving the vehicle sits on the left side and the passenger on the right. Experience has shown that it is beneficial for incoming leaders to sit in the, preverbal, right seat while observing the outgoing leader as they “drive” the mission. Then, at a designated time, the roles are reversed and the incoming leaders and Soldiers take the helm while continuing to receive council, mentorship, and training from the subject matter experts (SME).  
13 October 2006 marked my first day in the left seat as a Platoon leader on a combat patrol. After the final brief, I had a picture taken of myself, platoon Sergeant, three squad leaders and a hand-full of others. We loaded the vehicles and made our way towards Ogden Gate of Camp Ramadi. Outside the gate, the patrol made an immediate left onto Route Michigan. As the final vehicle radioed that they had exited the gate and that all vehicles were tracking on Route Michigan, the lead gun truck called up that they were on the bridge. The bridge crossed the head of a large canal spurring from the Euphrates River. As we reached the opposite bank we entered check point 294, marked by a large round-about in front of the Marine’s Base, Hurricane Point, a small triangle peninsula, wedged between the Euphrates River and the large cannel which supplied life down-stream. At check point 294 SSG Bratcher exited the base and climbed into our vehicle. I held the door and provided security for him on the back deck of the Buffalo. Once aboard we were moving again, turning southeast toward the heart of the city. As we passed Observation Point (OP) VA and reached check point 295, a major intersection, I noticed a large bag in the center of the right lane, just before the intersection. From the bag extended a thick cable leading off the roadway to the right. I was not the only one to have noticed. It was like a page out of a training lane. “This is too obvious” I thought, but indicated for the driver to approach and for the robotic arm operator to interrogate. After disconnecting the cable, the arm operator emptied the contents of the bag. Two 125mm projectiles flopped out onto the asphalt. “Surely route clearance was not this easy.” I thought. The contents secured, and with spirits soaring, we continued mission (CM). Prior to reaching the next intersection and checkpoint (296) the lead vehicle announced a speed bump in the center of the road with a wire disappearing into an ally to the North. A “speed bump”, I then learned, was a metal box with a low profile, tapered at the ends and filled with home made explosives (HME). This one appeared to be about 12” wide by 12” long and about 1 - 2” thick. It looked more like a giant ravioli square to me, but speed bump would work. The driver approached the device slowly and the arm operator extended the robotic arm to interrogate. Just as the arm reached the devise it exploded sending bits of shrapnel into the side of the vehicle. I burst out, “PAH!” The 23 ton vehicle didn’t even budge a millimeter. It not so much as popped a tire. That was it. My first engagement by the enemy. “This is awesome!” I declared. Suddenly a rocket wizzed past the front of the vehicle and slammed into the barrier on the opposite side of the road. This explosion was no laughing matter. The driver stomped the accelerator to the floor just as a second rocket screeched out of the alleyway from the North and just past the rear bumper of the vehicle. The concussion shook the truck and shook me to the depth of my gut. We narrowly escaped the ambush. It appeared the obvious first IED had been a delay tactic to set up the actual ambush farther up the road. The speed bump had worked exactly as designed, to slow us down and stop us in the kill zone. Those 57 mm rockets would have torn right through us had the trajectory been more accurate. We were lucky to be alive.  
At check point 296 the entire patrol doubled back, cautiously approaching the gauntlet we had just traversed. Then proceeded North on route Ice cream, so named for the Ice cream sign on the corner store. Although I never got any ice cream there. We crept slowly up the street. If I were to describe it as a snail’s pace, it would be like comparing a turtle to the speed of sound; we were moving like pond water. Then the lead truck called up that they had a cut out; another new term for me. Insurgents skillfully used a concrete saw to cut into the roadway and remove the asphalt, then dug a hole with a shovel or post hole digger precisely the size of the ordnance or other explosive material. They then returned the "cap" as if nothing were there. They did this with such meticulous precision that it was extremely difficult to detect or disarm. But it had rained earlier that day and while it had mostly dried up our timing was such that the water which seeped into the cracks had not dried as quickly as the rest of the roadway, highlighting the cuts in the asphalt. It was like a beacon declaring “IED buried here”. We found and disarmed two additional cut outs that night before returning to base, but not before the last vehicle was attacked with a couple of grenades. It had been an eventful night to say the least. We had made it unscathed and we continued to become more proficient at or craft. But, 5 nights later, without the helpful mentorship of the departed unit we replaced, the near fatal events would test us almost to breaking.