**[Chapter One: The Early Days]** My earliest memories are of school. The earliest is of preschool, running around in circles. I remember the song we sang about it, “See me run, running around in circles, running and running, running around the room”. Songs are a powerful way to remember things. Vivid images, smells, and emotions also connect those synapses in the brain in binding ways that make them forever easy to recall. I remember in pre-school a kid named Cody eating my cousin Andy’s glue; that evokes some vivid images, smells, and emotions. I learned a lot from Mrs. Kathy at Kerr Preschool. I learned and worked hard, but I didn’t know that I was learning or working hard. I simply enjoyed it. Lesson learned: **work hard and enjoy it.** That is a theme comes up again and again in my life. I have not ever been the smartest, strongest, most attractive, or most social person in the ”office“, but being a person that others can count on, because they know you will contribute meaningful effort, makes me a valuable member of the team. For the other part, having fun does not have to mean implementing recess and playing on the merry-go-round at lunch (although it doesn’t need to be ruled out either). It does mean that the work environment should be enjoyable enough for workers not to prefer to get in a car accident accompanied by a trip to the hospital on the way to work in order to avoid setting foot in the building. (Please tell me I’m not the only one to have felt that way before.) It doesn’t require giggling pillow fights or slides between floors to be fun, although I love that idea (The giggling fights not the silly slide idea, of course). It does require some recognition of humanity, which is possible in all organizations, yes, including serious and dangerous organizations such as the military. I don’t remember much about the first grade, only that my teacher Mrs. Terman quickly became known as Mrs. “Termite”; which is hilarious when you’re a six year old boy. Being the recipient of such ridicule is, however, less humorous. Called names, or told, “Scotty, Watty, needs to go Potty”, sounds ridiculous now, but devastated my six year old self. Lesson learned: **Be kind**. No one likes to be called names or belittled. It seems like a simple lesson but apparently, many leaders did not learn in the first grade that bullying and hazing along with, sexist, racial, comments, ethnic slurs and innuendos are not appropriate. Don’t do it. Don’t laugh at it. Don’t tolerate it. Even if it is sarcastic or in jest, it is no ok, it’s not funny, stop it! My second grade teacher attempted quiet time; which worked only because if we were quiet enough, for long enough, she would fall asleep, and if we stayed quiet, she would stay asleep. Even 7 year old boys can be quite if it means getting away with mischief. There was always one sweet girl who would burst the bubble of dream time by waking the teacher, to everyone else’s dismay. Lesson learned: never trust sweet girls… That’s probably not it. I’m probably just upset because I totally had a crush on her and I never said anything. Maybe there is a better lesson here for me or someone else to glean; then again, it may be true that “sometimes a cigaret butt is just a cigaret butt"(attributed to Sherlock Holmes) in other words, maybe sometimes a funny story is just that, an entertaining, funny story. Or, maybe I will understand this story better by the time I get to chapter 4.5. I discovered something about myself in the third grade that I didn’t understand well until many years later and I was not able to have a handle on it until years after that. I learned that I didn’t like busy work. I discovered, at the age of 8, that sometimes my teacher, Mrs. Peterburg, gave us things to do for the sole purpose of keeping us busy and, by default, quiet. No one likes to have their time wasted; not even an 8 year olds. Lesson learned: **Don’t waste people’s time**, it is precious to them. Regular people will do extraordinary things if they believe it is useful. That’s not earth shattering news but we don’t always apply it to those we love or lead by that golden rule. Make no mistake, people love to waste their own time. They are experts at it. They will spend every available hour watching videos of other people playing a game or lining up colored shapes on a tiny screen. But they want to do it themselves, don’t waste it for them. This discovery of busy work stuck with me, jaded me even. By the time I reached the seventh grade I was convinced that all school work was busy work. I convinced myself that I was a victim of “the system” (I would find out many years later that most teenagers feel that way; somehow, like everyone else, I thought I was the only one.) In that year I took a keyboarding class. In that class I discovered, and subsequently became a master of, the “copy and paste”, made possible by the advent of WordPerfect. I finished my work in a third of the time as my classmates, whom I thought were not nearly as smart as me. While they typed away, I played “Scorched Earth” off of a floppy disk I brought to class with me. I mastered sending a tiny blip across the screen at the right trajectory to hit the opposing player’s tiny pixels in the shape of a tank. I did not, however, master typing. By the time I realized the purpose for the repetitive typing of the same letters and sentences over and over, it was much later, and by later, I mean, too late. Even now as I type these words, looking at my fingers and pecking for the keys, I wish that I had understood the purpose of the task. I could have met the intent. Simon Sinek is synonymous with the leadership and life principle of “**Start with Why**”. With his, now famous, “golden circle” he described in a TED Talk how most of us start with ”what” and then ”how”, but rarely articulate the reason why. The video went viral, and continues to garner millions of views, confirming the need for someone to describe this simple, yet vital, principle. But understanding why goes far beyond motivation. Critics of Sinek’s New York Times best selling book, complain that it could have been a pamphlet. What makes the concept powerful is how simple it is. I wish to emphasize how understanding why helps team members see how what they do fits in to the overall strategic objectives. This is paramount to knowing what to do In the absence of specific instruction about every possible scenario. It is what allows a leader to lead and to manage without micromanaging. Expressing why is the key because it allows for innovation, creativity, and individual skills to achieve objectives. I was not a lazy kid. I did great work when I enjoyed it and when I bought into the reason for it. I worked hard on the farm, often times riding my bike to the barn a mile and a half away to milk the cows without supervision before my age had double digits. I did make up games to make long bike rides bearable. We had names for our bikes. Mine received the ingenious name “Predator”. Probably because it was written on the padding of the handlebars. I would call out the play by play of the ride as if I were an announcer at a horse race. “And Karen riding on Rainbow-Rider is lagging behind but here she comes with her second wind! She’s passing Schwinn! She’s coming around Husky! And it’s neck ’a neck with Predator! Here they come across the finish line! It will be a photo finish folks! Yes, it’s Rainbow-Rider over Predator by a tire width! Unbelievable! No one expected it! She’s making a victory lap waving to the crowd. Games, singing songs, telling stories, or a good water fight, always made the hours go better. **Yes cheesy, yes corny but true just the same as Mary Poppins sang, A spoon full of sugar helps the medicine go down.** – Mary Poppins When I was about ten years old my family stayed in a cabin with my Mom’s sister and her family for Thanksgiving. Stormy weather kept eight rowdy kids inside. No video games or toys in the cabin made a pillow war inevitable. Though not a regular “fight” it definitely escalated to a conflict of epic proportions.. One fateful throw landed a pillow from a loft into the light fixture high above the floor. Smoke soon billowed from the super-heated pillow case. Panic followed, as the object was too high to reach. Children screamed and adults scrambled for things to stand on and objects long enough to reach the pillow before it burst into flames. In the chaos I calmly walked to the light switch and turned it off. Everyone froze, and the room went silent for a moment. The smoke began to clear. Then everyone broke into laughter with expressions of “I should have thought of that”. The truth is that, sometimes the solution to an issue within your organization is simple. Sometimes it comes from an unexpected person. **Don’t be afraid to listen to everyone and don’t be afraid to suggest the simple solution you have either.**