**13 - Apr 15****￼****Theme: High Expectations & The Pygmalion Effect**  
[Chapter Four: Part 2]  
For my first assignment in Costa Rica, I found myself paired with a missionary from Honduras. It is typical for missionaries to have a companion missionary to work alongside. My companion would teach me everything from where to get breakfast and catch the bus, to how to teach and serve with love, but he did not speak English and, as much as I had studied, I truly did not speak Spanish. It would be a challenging experience. In addition to miles of walking and talking to hundreds of people, Elder Ventura drilled me constantly on my gringo accent. “Roca, piedra, turunca,” he repeated. I attempted again and again. Before long, locals began to ask where I was from. I didn’t always understand their questions nor was my vocabulary truly up to the point that I could explain it when I did understand, but my accent had improved to the point that many people were convinced that I was a native Spanish speaker. That is until they heard me speak more and my limited vocabulary and faulty grammar gave me away.  
The President the mission interviewed all of the missionaries one on one every couple of months to gage their wellbeing and provide individual counsel. In my first such interview about a month after I arrived the President started something like this “Elder Sparrow," he said looking me in the eyes, "eres un buen misionaro” (Elder being my missionary title.) “Elder Sparrow, you are a good missionary” he complemented me in Spanish. “Gracias presidente” I said back with my fresh gringo accent, feeling pretty good about myself. He looked at me, squinted his eyes slightly, and brought his eyebrows closer together as he shook his head from side to side “pero no eres un misionaro excelente. Nesesito que seas un misionero excelente. Entiendes?” (”But you are not an excellent missionary. I need you to be an excellent missionary. Do you understand?”) I shook my head up and down. I did understand, but I was devastated. He proceeded to provide me with some specific areas to improve. I understood basic principles but lacked a deeper knowledge of scriptural text and doctrine. I obeyed the mission rules but fell short of keeping my thoughts and actions consistent with a representative of a supreme power. President Gonzalez gave me some specific areas to study and actions to demonstrate maturity. That verbal gut punch motivated me to work harder and be better. My dad had told me in the first letter he wrote to me at the MTC “There are many motivational words of encouragement but none of them work unless you do”. I determined to work hard and become a misionaro excelente.  
Don’t be afraid to let someone know when they need to step up their game. Slackers and high performers alike respond to sincere, directed, constructive feedback. Those who do not respond to constructive feedback fall into the category discussed previously that should be removed from the organization as to not drag down the team. This is of course a balance. I am not at all suggesting the constant pointing out of faults and specifically discourage belittling, yelling, or attempting to motivate through passive aggression. Complements and encouragement are better motivators but we often think that because we see the specific deficiencies that they must be obvious to the one committing them. Shown the path to success most of us will be happy to get on that road.