**Chapter Nine: Learn**  
In June of 2007 with the troop surge in full swing in Iraq and with Al Anbar a much calmer place, the battalion commander selected my platoon to go to an area south of Bagdad that had not been occupied by coalition forces sense the beginning of the conflict. Insurgents used the area as a route to smuggle explosives up the Tigerus River and into Bagdad. Arriving just in time for the combined arms rehearsal, I burst into the tent with a bit too much bursting. The briefer paused. All eyes turned to me. I diverted my eyes with a sheepish look and gave a tiny wave. The briefer continued without further hesitation, someone handed me an order / concept brief, and I sat down in a metal chair near the front. I scanned through the document. A year before this would have been a daunting read to understand the background, forces involved, the enemy posture, enemy capabilities, and likely attack plan. I skimmed it rapidly, digesting acronyms, abbreviations, short hand, maps, graphics, and other symbols with ease. But I didn't find me. I didn't find my team. Where was the route clearance? I set down that document and turned my attention to the other document given to me that contained the order of battle. I should be right there, near the top, as the lead ground element to clear the route, but I was not there. Nor was I attached with some other security force. There, at the bottom, fifth in the order of march, after all combat forces and just before the logistics units, I found a note for engineers. I raised my hand. "Why is the route clearance team 5th in the order of march." I asked when finally called on to speak. Everyone stared, then looked around for someone else to answer. I didn't think I asked a dumb question. Someone from the plans section finally said with mustered confidence, "to make sure the route is cleared for the follow on logistics elements." Everyone nodded to show approval for the answer and the brief continued. But I was not at all satisfied.  
After the brief I cornered the Platoon Leader from Alpha Company designated to be first in the column. "What's your plan for finding and reacting to IEDs?" I interrogated. He showed me a plan for where he would dismount troops and how his lead Bradly fighting vehicle would scan the road. It's exactly how I would have done it if I had to do it with the same equipment and people he had. It was a good plan, except one thing, he didn't just have the tracks and guys on his team, he had the ability to use a route clearance team. I tried to convince him that he had other assets at his disposal but in true, can do, this is my mission and I'm going to do it the best I can, infantry fashion, he shrugged it off. I spoke to the Battalion Intel officer to get a better idea of what types of resistance and what types of devices we would encounter. I put in my plug to him about us clearing ahead of the other forces. "Sounds good to me." he shrugged. He was not the one that needed convincing. He didn't have authority to make the change. I tracked down the plans officer who put the plan in writing to plead my case to him about sending the clearance unit first. He was bright and listened but his experience with route clearance had been that they kept major lines of communications, main supply routes, and logistics corridors open after combat forces conducted initial kinetic operations. He was doctrinally not wrong. But I was suggesting another way. I talked to a half a dozen people each time introducing myself, describing the equipment in my formation explaining our capability, and then unpacking the concept of sending the element that has the capability to detect and disable explosive devises first in the operation. All seamed mildly interested in the sales pitch but ultimately understood better and were more comfortable with the status quo. Changing their rehearsed techniques felt uncomfortable. Changing things this close to kick off seemed, to them, ill advised. Discouraged I still hadn't shared the information with my platoon. I knew the reaction they would give, "5th in the order of march? What are we even here for?" I made my way to the chow hall dejected. In route a First Sergeant approached me. "Are you the route clearance platoon leader?" he inquired. "Yes, First Sergeant." "I'm the Alpha Company First Sergeant he introduced himself then got right to the point. "Why are we going first? Why aren’t you up front?" Finally, an advocate. We redirected to the Alpha company command post and spoke to the company commander and platoon leader both of whom I had already addressed my concern and proposal. We approached the operations officer and the Battalion Commander. Both agreed with the assessment. The change was made and 2nd Platoon B Company took point. The operation was a huge success. The 1-30 established a new combat out post and Tactical Operations center without injuries and without a shot fired.
 
==As a leader you have to know what your team is capable of and sometimes you have to sale to your boss or others what you can and cannot do, or more importantly, how best to use you and your team to accomplish his mission and intent==.  
==Sometimes it takes more than one try to convince others, and many times it is a matter of finding the right person to be your advocate to help plead your case.==
 
Route Corvette barely accommodated our over-sized trucks with a large dry cannel on the left side to the south of the road and a steep embankment slopping down to the north on the Right side as we cleared West. Suddenly a huge explosion rocked the 23 ton truck I rode in. From the back of the Buffalo I looked past the other two rows of seats and out the front windshield toward where the explosion came. All I could see was a wall of dirt rushing upward like a geyser opened up in front of us. When the dirt fountain finally stopped ascending, chunks of dirt and rocks rained down on top of the truck in a thunderous hail storm. The dust in the cab was over powering making it hard to breath.  
As the dust cleared I could finally see that the explosion did not target my truck but had been a direct hit on the vehicle 15 meters to the front of us. The capsule containing the driver was the only thing on the road on the near side of a huge crater that split the road in half. The small pod was facing us and all of the wheels, axles, frames, and every other part of the truck were sheered off and scattered for football fields in all directions. I could see the top half of Privet Hanson’s body mostly buried in dirt and completely cleared of the operator compartment. He lay motionless. The whole world after that began to move in slow motion. I could see myself, in my mind’s eye, walking up to Privet Hanson’s mom’s house, knocking on the door and asking ”good morning Mrs. Hanson, how’s Kevin doing today?” ”Oh, he’s having a pretty good day.” I heard her say as she let me in to see Hanson in a highchair doing a poor job of putting yogurt in his mouth. With a smile and in broken speech he said “good morning, Lieutenant Sparrow”. I knew he might not make it and if he did, an explosion of that magnitude likely turned his brains to J-E-L-L-O.  
To this day I cannot determine how the rear truck made it around our huge vehicle on that narrow road but even before the dust fully cleared there it was, in front of us. Soldiers on the ground with a litter gently pulled Hanson form the wreckage. The radios were on fire with chatter. I had one to each ear on separate nets (networks).  
“Battle Main this is Wolf, over”  
“Wolf, Battle Main”  
“Battle Main, IED Vicinity grid AA 1234 5678. The road is split by the blast. I have one Vic (Vehicle) stranded on the far side of the blast hole. I have one US unconscious at this time. I need a MEDEVAC at LZ Red. Nine line MEDEVAC request to follow, over” As I spoke SSG Heddlesten spoke over the other net.  
“6, 7, we need a MEDEVAC, I recommend LZ Red. Let me know when you are ready for the nine-line.”  
“7, 6 send it, over” Over one radio I heard SSG Heddlesten relay the Medical Evacuation request into my ear as I passed it on over the other radio.  
“Roger Wolf, Dust off is going wheels up, ETA to LZ Red, 15 Mikes.  
“How long until you can have that bird here 6?”  
“He's going wheels up as we speak. He'll be wheels down at the landing zone in 15 minutes, over”  
"Roger, out." That was the last I heard from him until Dust off was wheels up with Hansen, but there was zero break in the chatter.  
“Wolf, Demon"  
“Demon, Wolf”  
“We are a click (kilometer) out from your location, on the other side. We are moving to secure your stranded vic on the far side of the blast hole, over”  
“Roger Demon, over” (I could hear the roar of the Bradley Fighting vehicles behind me as he turned around to transport Hanson to the LZ as the wine of the engine and the chartering of the tracks became more faint I thought about what I had just said roger to. I had just given the OK to the Abrams tanks of Demon Company to move down an un-cleared road. Clearly there were IEDs. Clearly they were big enough to swallow a tank. At that moment someone else on my team called over the net and expressed the same concern “that’s an uncleared route 6 we need to tell Demon to stand fast.” I formulated the message in my head, I would tell them to stand fast and not go down the route, that we would figure out how to take care of our truck isolated on the far side of the blast crater. The moment had passed… I felt a shiver from an explosion off in the distance. My heart sank. I prayed that what I knew had happened was not true. But I knew it was. The panicked voice over the radio confirmed, “**IED! IED! IED!!!”** The explosion tossed the 70 ton Abrams tank aside into the dry canal bed onto its top. There was no time to reflect, yet, on what I should have prevented. The radio demanded my attention in my other ear.  
“6, 3”  
“Send it 3”  
“My gunner has the trigger man 500m to the north of our position. Are there any friendlies in that area? Over.”  
“3, 6, there are no friendlies in that area, over” I confirmed.  
“6, 3, permission to engage. over.”  
“3, 6, I am not seeing what your gunner sees. If he has PID (positive identification of an enemy threat) he is clear to engage. The gunner, CPL Krier, was not the one speaking. He was zeroed in on his target but as I spoke he heard the green light through his headset. I instantly heard the distinct bark of 5, maybe 6, rounds from the M 240-B Machine Gun. I keyed in on the target. CPL Krier and been deadly accurate, from what later was confirmed to be over 800meters away. Two puffs of dust loomed in the air from the two bullets that skipped off the dirt, the next hit knee high, and the next two or three rounds impacted center mass. The remaining Bradley fighting vehicle in the formation followed the rounds in on impact as well. The 25mm cannon engaged. Palm trees surrounding the target snapped and exploded and the car of the enemy caught fire and caused a secondary explosion.  
The Bradley carrying Hanson arrived at the Landing Zone at the exact moment that the helicopter landed.  
Then the waiting game began as the hull of Hanson’s vehicle caught fire and the recovery assets were spun up to recover.  
Hours later with the hull still smoldering and the adrenaline warn off, I called over the radio for an update on Privet Hanson. “Battle Main, Wolf, over”  
“Wolf, Battle Main”  
“Looking for an update on my Soldier who was MEDEVACed, over”  
“Wait one,” I guessed they wouldn’t know just how bad he was but would a least be able to tell me he was on his way to Germany or the States or something.  
“Wolf, Battle Main”  
“Battle Main, Wolf send it”  
“He’s RTD, over”  
“Say again, over”  
“I say again, That Soldier is returned to duty” I knew what it meant; it just didn’t make sense.  
I hesitated, “Battle Main this is Wolf, from the route clearance team. We had a Soldier hit by a huge IED that was MEDEVACed a couple hours ago. I highly doubt he will return to duty any time soon.”  
After a long pause on the net, for which I figured he would get his facts straight, he replied “Wolf, I have battle roster number K1134”  
“That’s him, over”  
“RTD, Wolf, over”  
I couldn’t believe it  
The Husky PVT Hansen operated could not be recovered. The fire burned for hours, so hot that many parts melted to the ground. When a team of engineers was sent to extract the hull. A Bradly was struck by another giant IED killing two Soldiers, leaving the hull on an island. With the blast hole from the IED that hit the Husky separating the road in front of it and the blast hole from the IED that hit the Bradly severing the road on the other side. My good buddy LT Pete forever gave me a hard time for melting down the best Husky in the fleet, that we borrowed from him, to a pile of molten metal
 
It would be less than a week later that we got PVT Hansen back behind the wheel of a Husky. As we traversed down route gnat, PVT Hansen’s vehicle was struck again by an IED. It was a relatively small explosion. PVT Hansen almost immediately got on the radio and reported “I’m ok” in a discussed voice that in just two words described how painful to was to be blown up again. After a deliberate search by the team for potential booby traps, SSG Heddlesten climbed onto the Husky and opened the hatch to check on Hansen.  
That night I finally allowed myself to pause and reflect on the events of the last few weeks. I couldn’t help but be proud of the misfit team. We had come a long way from the fights over whether we should rush to save or deliberately look for secondaries.
  ==I have learned many things, many the hard way, by life experience and failure. The critical thing is not how learning happens but that it does. Writing our lessons down is not just helpful for some distant descendant that may read our words. It is most helpful for you! Making mistakes is human and part of life. Making the same mistakes over again is crazy by definition.==  
==Sometimes you don’t realize how far you’ve come until you get to the end of the journey and look back at the road you traveled.==