**THE SWEAR JAR** _(Text: Chapter Three - Part 5)_  
One of the first things people noticed about me at basic training was the way I talked. Bobby Little, from Boston (whose name backwards is Little, Bobby), and Privet Young from Mississippi (who had no rhythm and could not march) had more distinct accents but it was more about what I didn’t say than what I did say. I didn’t tell dirty jokes or use foul language. Many Soldiers asked me why I didn’t; arguing that they are “just words” and that “it doesn’t matter”. I didn’t argue. I agreed. They are just words, and I _just chose_ not to use them. When I began my Advanced Individual Training some of the guys that went with me to basic training joined me. I remember vividly the first Sunday morning at AIT. I heard from across the bay “SPARROW WHAT?!”, “WHERE IS HE?”, “SPARROW!” PVT Drummond, who was huge, came into view as I moved to the center of the room. I saw that he brought company, all the people he had established as his pose over the first few days of being there. The rest of the bay of 60 people gathered around to see what was going on. I didn’t know what he wanted but he sounded angry. “You Sparrow?” he glared at me. “Yep,” I said as cheerful as I dared. “Green tells me you don’t G*^ D@#& swear.” “Nope,” I replied, again as cheerfully as I thought I could get away with. PVT Drummond spent what seemed like an eternity swearing words that I had never heard, and describing in the most disgusting way how little he thought of me. Then he stopped, looked hard at me, and walked away. The crowd dispersed murmuring. I went back to what I was doing, confused about what had just happened and why. I sent one up that I was still breathing out of my face and not a hole in my chest. Then I didn’t think much more about it. A few weeks later I stood in a formation with my platoon. The drill sergeants gave us instructions, as they always did, to stand still and not talk. I thought they were simple instructions, but the same meat head that never understood that “don’t talk” meant “don’t open and close your mouth while vibrating your vocal cords”, started trying to be funny and telling dirty jokes. I turned and looked at him and boldly said “shut up”. (Did I mention PVT Jones weighed in around 2 “fity” at 6’ 3”, dwarfing my 5’ 10” 145lbs with my rucksack on?) “What did you say to me?” he said shocked. I immediately regretted my approach. I had probably been too harsh, but I had already committed. “You heard what I said,’ Shut Up!’” I looked at him, “I am tired of getting smoked because you can’t keep your mouth shut and stand still.” In the Army, especially during entry level training, group punishment is the norm. If one person is out of line, everyone pays. This guy had caused us all to do any number of strenuous exercises, known as “getting smoked”, on multiple occasions for not holding his tongue. The conversation ended quickly as the drill sergeants returned. When the formation ended, I went to my bunk quickly followed by PVT Jones and the rest of the platoon. “Do you want to fight me, Sparrow?” he scowled looking down at me and puffing out his chest. I looked up and calmly replied. “No, I don’t want to fight you. It wouldn’t be much of a fight. You would crush me.” I hesitated, then determined that I was already in this and continued. ”I am just sick and tired of getting smoked because you can’t shut your mouth in formation.” “You’re just weak and can’t hack it,” he retorted. “I can do the push-ups,” I told him, “I can do the exercises. I just don’t want to have to, and we wouldn’t have to, if we would all just do what we’re supposed to do, and keep quiet in formation.” I knew at any minute this guy was going to feed me my teeth. I had visions of blacking out and waking up on the floor. Then something unexpected happened. PVT Drummond stepped between us. “Come on Jones. You just can’t talk sense into this guy,” and he pushed him away. Nothing more was ever said to me about either of those incidences. But I was again grateful to have the same number of holes in my face, and Jones did tone it down a bit. There was another Soldier of my faith in 44 Truck, PVT Johnson. He tried hard to fit in and make friends. He relaxed his standards. No, he didn’t do anything unconscionable, or even pick up any addictive habits. He just decided to use foul language and laugh at the off colored jokes. What happened surprised me. I became a person who was respected and admired for having principals and living by them. PVT Johnson became a laughing stock; mocked for having no discipline or backbone to follow what he claimed to be right. I don’t know that this is worth much more than a good story for anyone else. But for me it represents more than a story. It represents who I am. I couldn’t swear now if I wanted to. I used the word “pissed” to describe how upset I was in an email I sent once and I lost a little respect from the some of the foulest mouthed people. Probably writing it here got a rise, or maybe a chuckle, from a few of you. But for some, who have never heard me say it, I may have even lost a little credibility. I have a reputation to uphold. I am respected for having discipline and control of myself, including my tongue. Where does this leave me as a leader? No, I don’t have a swearing jar, nor am I advocating for it. I don’t point my finger at anyone and call them a heathen, that's not helpful and would only make me look arrogant. They just know that I don’t talk like that. Have I heard crude things said that I thought were funny? Sure. Do I respect and admire people who also cuss? Absolutely. My grandpa had a farmer’s tongue. I’m in the military and a combat veteran. I expect to hear Soldier and Sailor words, but I do not tolerate racial or sexual comments no matter how sarcastic or humorous they are meant to be. There is no room for bigotry on a team. Eliminating offensive language and degrading comments from the work place makes it an environment people want to work in. **Demonstrating discipline earns respect and leads to disciplined followers.**
 
After Basic Training I went home for a few months and began a job at Icon Health and Fitness making treadmills on a production line. I worked on a team with one other person. She would start the treadmill for the first time, checking functionality. I would put on the back roller and then adjust the belt. It was at my station that any issues with the machine were often discovered for the first time. When something had a problem, the machine was moved off the production line and onto the “mechanics loop”. The mechanic would fix the issue and move it back onto the line or assemble the machine alone before sending it through the quality control booth. I quickly learned that I could fix many of the issues myself without sending the half assembled machine off to be someone else's problem. I also discovered that by doing so I could save a lot of time in the production process. I found, for example, that if a bad batch of circuit boards were put into the treadmills that the workers putting in circuit boards simply continued to put them on and it took a long time before the problem was finally cut off at the source. If I identified the issue, I could stop bad circuit boards from being put in, quickly change out those already on the line and keep production running.
 
My line leaders saw in me an ability to work independently and when a position came available to bring parts to the line I was offered the parts puller job. I enjoyed very much being off the grind of the line. I also made a few more cents an hour, a big perk for me as I was working to save money. With me off the production line, the mechanic became inundated with machines. No one was willing to step outside of their wrote production script. When he became overwhelmed and quit I was offered his position. I was initially reluctant but found that I could be bought for a few more cents an hour. I simply trained a few key people on the line what things to watch out for and empowered them to fix the issues before they got to me. Things ran so smoothly that I started assisting where there were bottle necks on the line. I didn’t do all of this unselfishly. Although I do enjoy helping others and fixing processes; we worked for piece rate. That meant that the more treadmills we made in a night, the more money we made. With the production line running smooth and everyone energized to make more money, quality control seemed to be the greatest hold up. So, I again was offered a few more cents an hour to work QC. Then after only a few short months, I got to be a lead in charge of a couple people for a special project. I don’t recall exactly what the circumstances were but I do remember one of the people on my team thinking I was too harsh and crying. When the project we were working on ended I went back to quality control and was not asked to continue in a lead position. I enjoyed my job and continued to make good money for me and the team. I learned many lessons from this experience
 
1- Seek for ways to help the team. Similar to the lesson form a previous story about helping individuals, Look outside of what you are doing to make the organization better. Often times you will be rewarded for your efforts.
 
2- As a leader, look for those who can make your team or organization better and put them in positions to do so, which may include a promotion.
 
3- Some people are born leaders, others have to work at it. Either way there are skills and attributes that can be learned. Otherwise books like this one would be useless. I clearly had to work at it. I had the potential. Which I recognize in myself as I look back and think about how I influenced others. But leading is more than motivating.
 
4- (this lesson came up again) not everyone is ready now but it does not preclude them from being ready later, especially with training or experience.
 
5- People are often promoted one level higher than their capability. Great workers do not always great leaders make. Give yourself some wiggle room to test those you promote and don’t be afraid to put them back to doing something they are good at or finding ways to use their skills in conventional ways and to reward in unconventional ways. Promotions don’t have to mean being in charge of more people.