**Week 43 - Nov 11: The Patch Ceremony**  
_Theme:_ **VETERANS DAY.** _Recognition (LTC Adgie)_  
[Chapter Eleven: Leaders Care]  
I stopped into the tactical operation center (TOC) to get a final intel update from the S2 and an operational update from the S3 before stepping off on our patrol. The TOC was really not much more than a giant dome tent. The surge of forces in Iraq in 2007 was made possible by extending the rotation time for the units already in theater and expediting the mobilization of deploying units, thus the overlap effectively created a flood of forces all at once. Incidentally the units who were weeks or in some cases days away from going home, after a year of combat were not happy with the idea of staying around. Many of them were angry dudes. The infrastructure built up to support a steady state of forces rotating in and out strained under the stress of such an influx. All of the hardstand structures available were occupied by remaining units and the 1-30th, as the new kids on the block, set up their tents where they could push out the perimeter walls and find space.  
I was just wrapping up with the S3 when LTC Adgie, the 1-30th "Battle Boar" commander, emerged trough the zipper and Velcro tent flap. "Wolf, what are you in for?" he asked jovially, filling the tent with his dominating figure and deep gruff voice. I showed him my CONOP (concept of operation), map, and route plan. "We have a mission, Sir" I replied crisp and cheerful. His kind but matter-of-fact nature was contagious. "What time do they SP (start point)?" He asked, turning away from me and addressing his operations officer. "They leave in about an hour, Sir." LTC Adgie's large eyebrows and broad forehead furrowed "They'll miss the patch ceremony?" he stated more than questioned. "Can we push back the mission a few hours?" He directed more than asked. "Roger, Sir. They are clearing in support of our operations. So that would mean we have to shift everything to the right." LTC Adgie in one nod said, ”Why isn’t it already done?”, then he turned again to me. "At ten hundred hours is our patch ceremony. We'll see you and your platoon there." "Yes, Sir" was all I could say to his back as he ducted through a tent flap and into another room in the connected tent maze. There was no need for explanation, no room for rebuttal. "Be there, lined up, at least 30 minutes early to rehearse" the S3 admonished me, as we found ourselves alone again. I looked at him quizzically with a look that asked "really 30 mins early just to stand around". He gave a look back that confirmed, "the boss runs a tight ship. He invited you as a member of the family, don't blow it." he turned back to a computer screen, "Your SP will be one hour from the completion of the ceremony." He stated with his back to me.  
Unit patches, officially called Shoulder Sleeve Insignia, are worn on a Soldiers left sleeve to denote unit assignment.1 Soldiers who deploy to a designated combat zones for 30 days or longer are authorized to wear the shoulder sleeve insignia of the unit they deploy with, on the right sleeve, known as a Combat Patch. Effectively what LTC Adgie had done, was to designate us as part of his team. The paperwork that would follow would authorize my platoon to wear the 3rd infantry division combat patch on our right shoulder for the duration of our career and have it permanently in our record. This put us in the ranks with Audie Murphy, the most highly decorated American who was a "Dog Faced" Soldier. Along with the other heroes of the 3rd ID, the only US Army Division to fight the Axis powers on all European fronts during WWII.2  
I walked back to our tents, cramped and already stifling hot, even though the summer sun had only risen from the dust a few hours before. "Huddle up," I called out as I came around a Texas barrier and into view of the platoon. No one was surprised. They all expected an update when I returned from the TOC. I looked around as they gathered. There were clearly people missing. "Bring in everybody" I clarified, "whether on this mission or not." "Howser's at the motor pool getting my truck ready" Hale declared with a "that ain’t going to happen" air. "I'll fill him in." He offered as a concession. Brummett, Young, and Heddlesten all responded similarly, with Soldiers spread out conducting various tasks getting ready for the mission that I was about to tell them was postponed. "Fine, let me put out some things to who we've got.“ I took a breath knowing there would be backlash. ”The mission is pushed back until after the patch ceremony." already the tension began to mount. "Routes aren't going to get cleared and Soldiers are going to be put in danger so they can do some dumb ceremony!? That's stupid." Hale declared. Others agreed. "Hold on", I tried to salvage this. "All operations are pushed back, so no one will move until we do, and we are invited to the ceremony." "That's worse, we're all invited to stand together and wait for a mortar to land in the middle of us and kill half a battalion!? No thanks. I don't need to watch them get a patch. We're not doing it." The look on my face must have given somethings away "L-T, tell me you didn't volunteer us to be there?" This was not going well. "Listen," I continued "I just watched LTC Adgie, the BN Commander, direct the S3 to push back every operation so that he could put his 3rd infantry division patch on your shoulder. That means something. No other unit has done that for us. This is a small token of appreciation for what we do. We will all be there.“ I looked at SSG Hale, ”Everyone” I paused, "line up outside the TOC at 0930." Then I walked away before anyone could rebuttal. I didn't often make demands but this was one thing I felt strongly about. I respected my team for a mission first attitude and a distain for all things garrison related in a combat zone, it's one of the things that made us great. But there were times to pause for recognition, and this was one of them. Whether they would admit it our not, there was pride in there eyes as we put on the broken tv screen patch of the dog face Soldiers.  
After 48 missions in 45 days we stood in formation again. LTC Adgie personally pinned medals on the chest of most of the Misfit Soldiers. Those 45 days where some of the hardest fought days we experienced. Our team had risked our lives to clear the way, a safer path for others to follow. A tiny bit of ribbon isn't much, but it meant the world to us that someone noticed.  
Recognition goes a long way. “It’s amazing what a man will do for a piece of colored ribbon (-Attributed to Napoleon Bonaparte)+1