(told by 2LT Sparrow)  
"Lieutenant Sparrow!" He recognized me that was good. "What happened? Was it an IED? I guess we missed it." "Yeah, It's ok, everybody's ok." I reassured as he answered his own questions. "I guess we missed it he repeated." He suddenly sat up slightly from the stretcher and looked me in the eyes very seriously. In a quiet voice, almost a whisper he said, "Lieutenant Sparrow, You gotta' tell me, I can't remember" He paused then asked soberly. "Do I have a hot girlfriend?' I smiled. I heard that he recently started writing to a girl online and the rumor had it that she was quite attractive, but I didn't know for sure. I started to shake my head and tried to say that I didn't know but he stopped me cold. "Sir, if I don't have a hot girlfriend just lie to me, tell me I have a hot girlfriend." So I told him, "Yes Shope, you have a hot girlfriend" "I knew it!" He blurted out, surprising everyone in hospital room, "I knew I had a hot girlfriend!" he pumped his fist. Everyone looked and chuckled. "I knew I had a hot girlfriend" he repeated more quietly and to himself. It was good to see him smile. We were both quiet for a moment and then he asked "Sir, What happened?" Shope had been the driver of an RG31 in the lead of the route clearance team from 3rd platoon. A police officer by profession, and an avid tracker and guide as a profitable hobby, he had a sharp logical mind that suited him well for hunting IEDs. By all indications he had been uncomfortable and concerned with that spot but hadn't detected anything. As he inched forward to look closely at another disturbance a few feet forward a massive explosion rocked the truck and crew. I started to describe what I knew. "Was it an IED?" He asked. I nodded my head. "We must have missed it." "It's alright, everyone's going to be alright." I reassured again He looked at me serious again "Sir, do I have a hot girl friend?" Before I could answer he continued "if I don't have a hot