**PHASE 8: OPERATIONS (Competence)**  
**Week 33 - Sep 02: Just Let Us Know**  
_Theme: Briefing the platoon & The Ikea Effect_  
[Chapter Eight: The team needs a clear task, purpose, and end state]  
Every day in Ramadi the schedule went something like this: I would get up about noon, get dressed, go out to my truck, which my awesome platoon always had ready, do a radio check, then move out Ogden gate and into the City of Ramadi. We turned left out the gate, crossed the Euphrates river, and then at check point 294, made a left into Hurricane Point, the Marine base. Once inside we parked our vehicles. Myself, my platoon sergeant, and squad leaders, walked into the former palace of Ude Husain for our ConOP (Concept of Operation) brief. I sat at the big boy table with the JTAC “Jr.”, EOD (Explosive Ordnance Disposal), Gunnery Sergeant Bratcher, and the other Marines. The brief was similar every day. Usually Captain Mahar, commander of Weapons Company, a great Marine and a true professional (Go Army, Beat Navy) would brief, although the 1-6 Mar Battalion Operations Officer took the helm when the mission was at the BN level and the BN Commander, LTC Journy, was almost always present - a great commander and a great leader. After the brief we loaded the trucks and moved back to Camp Ramadi where I would brief my platoon on our part in the mission. Initially I planned the brief alone. When I briefed the plan there were always lots of questions. “Why are we doing it that way? Why don’t we do it this way?” Usually their ideas were better than the plan I identified and so I would take their suggestions. It would take time to hear the explanation of the alternate plan. Then more time to explain that the plan I just briefed was not the plan but, in fact, the new plan was the plan. Briefing this way made me seem week and unknowledgeable as a leader, it wasted people’s time, and worst of all, it caused confusion. What was the actual plan? One simple thing fixed all that. After the trip to HP, I would meet with my squad leaders for 15 to 30 minutes to go over with them the way I saw the mission happening. They would bring up questions and suggestions. Then when we went to the brief we came as a unified front with the best possible plan, taking into account each group’s piece in the mission. Once in a while suggestions were made by other members of the platoon. I welcomed them as it helped us all ensure we understood fully the plan and made sure we had the best plan possible. Most of those questions would already have been addressed in my leadership meeting and could be explained quickly. The united front for the plan made us all, as leaders, understand and buy into the plan. That ensured no insubordination, and maximum participation.  
Holding meetings, for meeting sake, is a waist of time, but having regularly scheduled touch points (yes, a fancy phase to disguise that it’s just a meeting) for productive collaboration is useful. Engineers and Artillery use the phase ”level the bubbles” to refer to getting everyone ”on the same page”