==Portah==
 
==Value denotes worth. The more valuable an item is, the more goods or services for which it may be exchanged. Value is always relative. The price (amount of goods, services, or money) a person is willing to pay for something varies greatly with individuals. It also varies by supply and demand. The most valuable thing on earth is not gold, diamonds, or any other precious metal or gem. It is the substance of life, water. A human can live for several weeks without food. But after only a few days one will parish for lack of water. I suppose that if the air we breathe were to become more scarce i.e. the supply of air was limited, that air would pass water as the most valuable resource on earth, as one can live mere minutes without air. In the case of air the supply is out pacing the demand. Thank goodness.==  
==A value may also be defined as a principal or quality, such as integrity or loyalty. Such value(s) hold intrinsic value-worth. While the price of one’s integrity may be measured by the monetary compensation one is willing to exchange for that integrity, it is arguable that if an individual is willing to compromise their integrity for any price then they have no integrity in the first place. If someone claims to be loyal to a spouse, but “sells out” for someone more attractive, then where they truly loyal? I’m not suggesting that a person who escapes an abusive relationship is not a loyal person or does not value loyalty. I am simply saying that something else was more valuable to them, such as life. It may even be that the loyalty to their children motivated them to leave. It may happen that a person values loyalty to a spouse to such an extent that they remain in an abusive relationship because of it. I don’t want to argue which value or set of values is the most important; only to point out that values vary by individual. Someone’s loyalty to a company may go only as far as that person is not offered more money by another company. But that same person may have enough loyalty not to sell that company’s secrets for any price.==  
==Values also hold relative value. While I may generally esteem efficiency as an uncompromising value, if it takes me longer to achieve something to accommodate someone else or teach someone how to do it, the long term benefit may warrant the time “wasted”.==  
==Groups, congregations, entire societies are formed around common values. The United States, for example, was founded on principals the all men were created equal. That inalienable and self-evident rights exist, such as life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.==  
==Life, for example, is a value and value our own lives the lives of others not included in the organization.==  
==The values espoused by the U.S. Army are remembered by Soldiers using the convenient acronym LDRSHIP. The values are: Loyalty, Duty, Respect, Selfless Service, Honor, Integrity, and Personal Courage. This is the basis for everything that is done; every mission that is accomplished. Your values have to be non-negotiable. Even when it is painful, honesty is the best policy. Bad news does not get better with time. Integrity means keeping promises even when no one will know but you. Whatever values your organization establishes they cannot be followed only when times are good. It is in those times of hardship when true values are the most important.==  
==In his book “The Millionaire Mind” Thomas Stanley describes the number one success factor of first generation deca-millionaires (those with a minimum net worth of 10 million dollars) was integrity. Their vendors, friends, and even their fiercest competitors all noted that they had fanatical levels of integrity.==  
==Dwight D. Eisenhower said, “==_The supreme quality for a leader is unquestionably integrity. Without it, no real success is possible… If a man’s associates find him guilty of being phony, if they find that he lacks forthright integrity, he will fail. His teachings and actions must square with each other. The first great need, therefore, is integrity and high purpose._==”==  
==It is easy to stay married through the good times. When one of my Soldiers was severely injured when an explosion rocked his vehicle, his buddies risked their lives to pull him to safety. Months later as he still lay recovering in a hospital bed his new wife decided that sitting at his side was consuming too much of her young life and she walked out of that hospital not to return. It is easy to say that you would not be the one to abandon your partner in their time of greatest need but until you are in that situation you do not know how you would react. Making those decisions early on and determining that you will stick by them no matter what, establishes you as a person of dignity, a person of integrity, a person of values.==  
==Making decisions early and often that you will not take a little off the top in the organization will save you from embarrassment and maybe jail time.==
 
==My son and I recently trained for and completed the 779 km trek along the French route to el Camino de Santiago. In order to achieve that monumental task regular mundane treks around the neighborhood for several month built strength and endurance but the trip didn’t happen on it’s own. It took spending time to establish a route plan, train tickets, hostel reservations, purchase equipment, etc. These other tasks sometimes trumped the time on a given day to get miles on our feet.==
 
==My== ==Enter another dichotomy. The key is recognizing that sometimes you have to let small things fail in order to do great things. The hard part is to== ==balance== ==planning for the future with doing the things that have to get done today. The funny thing about balance is that rarely is everything in balance on any one given day. It is not possible to spent some magic percentage of time each day on all the things that are important: X number of hours on work, Y number minutes on education, Z number of seconds on shopping and food prep, eating, family, leisure, church, exercise, service, sleep on and on. Even if it were possible to create such a schedule, sometimes a child’s band concert requires leaving work early. Sometimes a school paper necessitates the sacrifice of sleep. Once in a while taking time to relax, vacation, or play, supersedes all of it. Taking a meal to a sick neighbor may mean your own family is relegated to the sideline temporarily.==