**Week 32 - Aug 26: The Red Glow Stick**  
_Theme: Risk Mitigation vs. Risk Aversion_  
[Chapter Seven: Part 3]  
For the rest of the night we had it out. That moment was a turning point for me. Of all the lessons learned this lesson fundamentally changed the way I approached everything. The result was a determination to deal with risk deliberately. War is inherently, inevitably dangerous. Route clearance is unavoidably detrimental to one's life expectancy. But hand wave policies to deal with the danger and blanket declarations about how to plan for risk, potentially shift risk and do not actually mitigate it.  
So, should gunners be up? It depends. What is the risk? For the lead truck the greatest risk was a decapitating explosion from an improvised explosive device. Risk that was less present for gunners in the following vehicles especially if the first few trucks did their job of detecting and eliminating that threat. In order to deal with the risk of small arms fire, RPGs, and other external threats, gunners in the remaining vehicles would remain up. This was, of course a general concept but individual gunners were given autonomy to do their job, and mitigate the greatest risk, to the best of their ability.  
Should the other members of the patrol rush to the aid of a damaged vehicle? Again, it depends. We determined that if someone was in danger of their life, no matter the danger we would do all we could to rescue them. That did not mean that we would throw caution to the wind but it did mean we would accept prudent risk to rescue our buddies, whether from our platoon or other forces. We adopted a common, simple solution for communicating when radios were rendered inoperable from the shockwave of a blast. A red glow-stick against the window would show an immediate need for medical attention. Green would signify that rescuers could cautiously search for potential secondary explosions or an ambush prior to approaching the disabled vehicle. The use of a red chem-light was not to be employed lightly, because it meant the risk of others. A broken leg from a blast, for example, may be extremely painful and require medical attention but would not cause loss of life and attention could wait for a deliberate, thorough search.  
What else were we doing in the name of risk mitigation that was actually making our job more difficult and, in turn, actually making it less safe? The operator of the robotic arm on the Buffalo indicated that the bar armor used to mitigate the threat of RPGs blocked his ability to safely disarm IEDs. We analyzed data from thousands of missions and determined that, despite the attack on our lead truck just mentioned, the threat in the specific area in which we operated was very low. But that the risk of not finding an IED or not having the ability to see to disarm it was extremely high; so we removed the bar armor, to the horror of our leaders and peer clearance platoons, who could not understand why we would take off something designed to protect us. To me, it did not matter anymore what something was designed to do, It mattered what it actually did.  
We had sophisticated detection vehicles designed to detect metal in the ground but those vehicles had to be directly over the ordinance in order to detect it, a prospect that seemed counter to the idea of safely finding IEDs. Other teams used the vehicles with great success but we found greater success with other, less conventional, methods.  
Every aspect of every missions was analyzed to assess potential risk, determine the likelihood and severity of the threat, and develop a mitigation strategy.  
This moment defined our culture as a unit. We became adamant that we were the best unit to find a device and if we missed it, heaven forbid, we were the best equipped to take the hit.  
One night, my former Platoon Sergeant cornered me in the company command post. "You're getting pretty reckless out there." He scolded. I prided myself in being open to feedback and willing to adapt. Never did I expect the visceral response I felt from being called reckless. Were we unorthodox? Yes. Aggressive? Yes! Affective? Absolutely. But reckless? Absolutely not. Is route clearance dangerous? 100%. Is it risky? Not if mitigated properly.  
I do admit that we didn't balance well the long term risk to our force with the risk to our mission and the result was a culture of walking off things that probably required medical attention. It was a heavy price to pay for dedication to mission accomplishment and something that I still struggle with, recognizing that I should have done more to look after the long term effects of concussive blasts on my team.  
Leaders must make decisions. That is what you are paid to do. There are plenty of smart talented capable people, who can do their job without you or even do your job better than you. None of that matters. You are in that position and you are the decision maker. If there is anything that sets you apart from anyone else with or without a fancy title, you have to make choices.  
The solution to a problem is rarely binary, one or the other, but a combination of the two or an answer outside of what either party considers.  
I want to be clear about our tactics and operating procedures. Some of what we implemented is well known or common sense. Some of what we did was not the right way for other successful teams to operate. The important thing is that it worked for us, at that time, in that situation. The idea is not to glean specific procedures but an overall better assessment of risk, how to avoid risk aversion while mitigating potential dangers.  
We cannot be afraid to try. Bounce back with a can do attitude.