**Chapter 4.5: It doesn’t hurt to get lucky: Take advantage of it.**  
This is written as an intermediary chapter because the stories and lessons herein are less about leadership and more about life in general. I include it because it's a big part of my story, as is most of the living done by all leaders. I wish that I could profess to have found the balance that so many of us seek. I am convinced that there is no true ==balance== of a single day. Sometimes the short term need to be employed and put food on the table to subsist, takes precedence over the known long term benefits of continued education. Sometimes clambering bosses need to be asked for patience as we tend to an ill family member. Some jobs aren't worth missing every concert for. Sometimes "I'm sorry" is in order because of an unattended game due to a deadline or exam. Sometimes relaxation is out of the question when a neighbor needs help rebuilding their fence after a wind storm. Sometimes all our best efforts are not enough to be there for all the people and the things, all the time. Though the pendulum swings, I affirm that we should live a life of more than just work and more than just entertainment. While we might be out of balance at any one time, it is possible to look back and see evidence, overall, of a balanced, full, and meaningful life. So that's the goal; continue to check the azimuth and strive to keep, overall, all things in perspective.  
==For 20 years I've thought at times about the girls I dated, girls I was very fond of, the girls I had a crush on but was too intimidated to ask out. I've thought too of things I should have tried, parties I should have gone to, work I should have done better. Reflection is helpful and a recurring theme of this book but be carful, because the common expression that hindsight is 20/20, is flawed. Foresight is better vision most times. Hind sight tends to be skewed by assuming the outcome of a different choice. Reality is that we don’t know what that outcome would have been and so we imagine the best case scenario. Learning from choices is good, but dwelling on past choices can be crippling. Making deliberate choices, saying out loud, "given the information I have, at this time, this is the best choice I can make". This is particularly critical for me as a Soldier. I have made decisions that ended people’s lives or left them with life-long injuries, pain, and disabilities. I did not make those decisions lightly. At the end of the day I remain confident that I made the best decisions I could have at the time, with the information I had, and in the situation in which I found myself. In a less dramatic way, leader make choices that can effect a person’s livelihood. Making a decision to hire or fire someone is life altering.==  
==I don’t know that it is possible to live regret free, but making deliberate choices, living with the consequences of those choices, and moving on, is key for leaders and in life.==  
When I returned home from two years in Costa Rica most of my friends had moved on. Girls I dated where married. Guys I hung out with were at collage, or working, or both. In addition to a little culture shock, the life train had kept moving down the track and I felt as though I was still standing at the station staring at the ticket counter trying to understand the options. The sign appeared to be in English; I understood the words but I did not understand what it meant. Fortunately for me, another train was about to roll by and I was about to climb on board.  
While I knew eventually I would go to college, I _had_ joined the Army with that stated purpose in mind, serving a mission had been the only thing I really aspired to; the only goal I truly had. And I did it! Boom! But then, I had no idea where to go next. I spent a couple days looking for work near my parent’s house. I pretty quickly received an offer to work at a factory making plastic bags. It was more money than I had made in my whole life to that point, around $8.00/hr. When I interviewed for the job they told me they had a program to help pay for college, which got me very excited. Then, upon closer review of the work schedule, I realized I would be working 9 hour days and not able to go to school during the day. "When will I go to school"? I asked. "You can take night classes, I guess", was not the answer I was looking for, but I didn't know of any other option.  
A few days later, while I was almost resolved that taking a few classes in the evening was what I would have to do, my cousin Diana came to my folk’s house for a visit. Diana was two years my junior and although our families did a lot together when we were younger, the two of us had not been particularly close. She had two brothers closer to my age that I did most things with. (I do have one fond memory of the only trip I made away from the farm in Idaho when my sister and I flew to Texas where Diana and her family lived. Diana and I became fast friends the day we went to Six Flags in Dallas and no one else was as interested as we were in riding all the biggest rollercoasters.) Now my little cousin had a year of college under her belt. What happened? She had not been detoured in life by the Army and a mission, that's what happened.  
So I started asking questions like, ”how do you go to college?” She came back with harder questions like, “where do you want to go to college?” And, “what did you score on your ACT?” The shocking truth came out; I hadn’t taken the ACT. I had a singular focus remember? I didn’t have a vehicle, so Diana drove me down to Utah State University and showed me to the admissions office. Despite living less than 35 minutes away, I had never been to the campus. She helped me apply for financial aid. She somehow convinced the admissions people to conditionally admit me to the University for one semester pending I scored high enough on the ACT and maintained good grades. She helped me set an appointment to take the ACT the very next morning. I took it cold, with no studying, having been out or school for three years. I scored exactly the minimum agreed to score. I was in. I determined then to take a leap of faith to go to school full time and not work that dead end job. I quit before I started.  
==People come into our lives that change us for the better. These can be mentors, family members, or strangers. This is one of the greatest rewards and joys in life. The only thing greater is being that person for someone else. I am eternally grateful to Diana for being patient with me through the process and all my questions. But her impact on my life would not end there.==  
“We should go on a double date". Diana announced, "You bring down one of your return missionary friends and I will introduce you to one of my friends,” indicating that she had just the friend in mind. Although she was trying hard to act like this was the first time she thought of this great plan, she had obviously been cooking it up for some time. We actually talked about dating a lot. We even gave nicknames to people we knew. The nicknames were shallow indications of our primary attraction to that person such as "runner", "smart girl", and "super cute guy". We had entire conversations about people without mentioning names, “I saw super cute guy today. He’s so cute.” She was a bit boy crazy and clearly in the hunt for Mr. Right. She was ready to marry the right guy, right now, if she could find him. I had just returned from a two year sabbatical from even looking at girls and, although I was certainly ready to date, I had a different outlook than at any other time in my life. I had come up with a list of rules; criteria that a girl had to meet to be a candidate for companionship. #1 on the list for me was spirituality. It was a hard criteria to avoid after spending the entirety of two years with that focus.  
I had few ideas for dates when Diana asked what we wanted to do on this double date. I took a shot in the dark and asked if this girl had a current temple recommend. (In my faith it is necessary to hold an card which amounts to an endorsement from an ecclesiastical leaders in order to enter sacred temples. Holding a recommend can indicate a lot about a person’s commitment to principals. While recommends can be requested by members 12 years and older, for certain parts of the temple, recommends at that time were generally kept current only by members who have served missions and/or were married.) I was pleasantly surprised to find out she had a current temple recommend. She moved way up on my rating scale already.  
On 14 July 2000 I raced in my Silver Dodge Stratus with my buddy Jake to Diana’s house. We pulled up to the front and parked on the street. I jumped out and grabbed my white shirt and tie. I still needed to change and I was already late. As I rushed to the door Diana came out and greeted me. Behind her was a beautiful girl in a dark blue dress with light blue flowers. I said a quick hello, introduced Jake to Diana, then pushed past to get in the house and quickly changed. I figured there would be plenty of time for pleasantries once we were on our way. She’s cute I thought, as I changed. Rule #2: The girl I marry must be good looking, I don’t want to sound like a pig, hopefully putting spirituality at the top of the list helps, but if I was going to wake up every morning for the rest of my life to the same face, it needed to be a pretty face. If I was going to kiss the same girl every day after work for years to come I wanted to kiss an attractive girl. I actually debated with myself as I changed my clothes that day, "Is it shallow of me to make that the second rule?... Shallow or not, it didn't matter, I would marry someone attractive. No ugly girl for me. And this date was setting a standard." I opened her door, jumped in, and we were off.  
We talked as I drove. She worked full time in the mortgage division at First Security Bank (later bought out by Wells Fargo) while attending Weber State University full time in the evenings. Impressive! Rule #3 the woman I married must be a woman, not an older woman per say, but someone mature and ambitious. She must have goals and be working to obtain them, whatever they were. She must be professional and able to carry on an adult conversation.  
Just then, we passed the hairiest guy I have ever seen. He rode a rumbling motorcycle with monkey handle bars. He wore a black tank-top barely visible through the hair that was spilling out of every opening. The amount of shoulder hair blowing in the breeze was particularly impressive. We laugh about that guy’s hairy shoulders to this day.  
After the temple we went to "Stinky" Ream’s grocery store, a place none of us were too familiar with, to play a shopping race game. Each team was given an identical list of items to find and put in their team’s shopping cart. Team members had to remain with their partners though out the search. The first couple to place every item on the list in their respective carts and cross the finish line would be declared the supreme allied winner of the universe. Diana and Jake didn’t have a chance. We were off like a shot. Who in the world knows what cheese cloth is anyway? Much less where to find it; Paige, apparently. In order to give them a chance at redemption we raced to put the items back on the shelves where we found them. I figured our opponents would have a fighting chance sense they had just taken the items from the locations they would be putting the back to. I was wrong. We blew them out of the water. Cheesy, I know, but we had a good time. Rule #4 the woman I marry must be able to laugh and have fun. I play to win and we won, thanks to Paige. For my part, I just ran fast and pushed the cart. Which i’m sure is some kind of metaphor for my contribution to the partnership beyond that day as well.  
Paige asked if we could stop by her house to check on her brother. She explained that he has Down’s Syndrome and with her out of the house, he would likely be home alone, which had the potential to lead to mischief. Rule #5: The woman I marry must love and take care of family (I later added to that rule that she must want children, love children, and know how to take care of them). So I met Reese. At barley 5 feet tall he was almost as big around as he was tall. He smiled with his head cocked to one side, gave me a big hug, and said “I like you”. I wasn’t sure how to respond. “I like you, too.” I said. “Can I ask you one couple questions?” he asked. “Sure’” I replied. Paige gave me a look that said, “There is noo telling what he will ask"  
“Ok, here goes”, he said, looking at his sister with a devilish grin. “Are you going to get married with my sister?” It was little embarrassing, but I managed to mutter something about it being our first date and that I couldn’t say for sure. He smiled, “just askin”.  
Paige’s parents were home and her dad stepped in to continue the interrogation. He was kind and fatherly, asking less uncomfortable questions like "where did you go on a mission?" and "What are your plans now?", sparing me the third degree. Her mother entered, and we chatted a bit. She was cheerful and pleasant as well. Rule #6: I must get along with her family (I later added she must get along with my family). This one was huge for me. I knew lots of great couples who struggled because of fights about, or dealings with, lousy families.  
By this time I was starving. We headed back to Diana’s house to cook hamburgers. The deck was dark, the meat was frozen, I was unfamiliar with the grill. I’m embarrassed to admit that in 21 years of life I had apparently not managed to learn how to properly grill a hamburger. I counted on Jake to do the cooking. It took forever. Did I mention I was starving? It was finally announced to be done, it tasted terrible it was raw and nasty. Paige didn't complain, maybe commented that it was not completely cooked, but did not complain. (Knowing now how disgusting this is to her, makes that even more impressive.) Rule #7 the woman I marry must be able the keep a good attitude, even when things don't go well. She must be able to deal well in difficult situations.  
We tried to move on with the date after our late disaster of a meal by playing a game. We again crushed the competition. At one point I literally drew a single line while playing Pictionary and she guessed “telephone pole” the correct answer. Rule #8 The woman I marry must get along with me. (I later solidified this to say that she must love me. I later again added that I must love her. Maybe that’s obvious to most readers but if you’ve read to this point you are acutely aware of what a slow learner I am.  
I would later learn that she hadn't wanted to go out with me in the first place. She had come on the date fully prepared with all sorts of excuses for why she would have to end our date early. She didn’t use any that night. It was well past 1:30 the next morning before we decided to call it a night.  
The next March we were married.  
==Set priorities. Be bold in going after them. Be thoughtful, even prayerful, but not reluctant in making decisions. Your priorities certainly will not be the same as mine. I do not pretend this is a comprehensive or maybe even that insightful of a list. Sometimes I wonder if I should have added more things to my list or made sure the person I married was truly the right one for me. I travel a ton and I'm adventurous, Paige, not as much. Should adventurous have been a criteria? I wonder if her husband not traveling half way around the world for months at a time and leaving her home with four kids and projects left undone around the house was on her list, because I'm sure I'm not even filling the things on her short list. In the end I think two people who are truly committed to each other can make it work.==
 
"What kind of made up ridiculous rank is that?" I asked my buddy Matt Young when I returned to military duty. He wore a solid black circle on his collar where his rank should be. "I'm a Cadet," he declared proudly. "What the heck is that"? I shrugged. "I'm in the ROTC at Utah State.” My blank stare must have been enough of a clue that his acronym didn’t help me understand any better. He continued, “They‘re paying for me to go to school." I leaned in closer to him and pretended to whisper, "I'm going to Utah State too. They’re giving all of us money for college. I’m pretty sure that's why we're all here." I winked dramatically. "No, It's more than that". He insisted, "I'm on a scholarship, I get a stipend, I'm going to commission as an officer when I graduate." "Wait" I cut him off. I didn't know what a stipend was nor fully appreciate what commissioning meant, but I did understand what scholarship meant. "You mean they are giving you MORE money for doing basically what I'm already doing?" I asked skeptically. "Well you have to take a class, and there's PT (physical fitness), and a leadership lab," He responded. "So basically, no?" I asked. He shook his head. ”I guess, not really." "Well, where do I sign up?" I gestured, signing in the air. I didn’t know anything about ROTC, but I was already in the Army and I was already going to college. They wanted to give me more money and make me an officer; It sounded like a no brainer to me. Paige was not as convinced. We had been married only a few months. She was not thrilled about me being in the Army at all. "Look." I assured her, "I go camping with my Army buddies one weekend a month, they pay me good money to do it, and they are going to give me money for school. I'm in the Army Reserve. If I have to go somewhere, it's World War III and everyone is getting drafted anyway. I might as well be trained to know what I'm doing." That was my literal argument. There was no sign on my horizon, at that time, that I would ever be in harm's way or ever have to be away from her for longer than a two week field problem. August 24th, 2001, I contracted with the ROTC program. The events just a few weeks later of September 11th 2001, would change everything. It would lead to me being home less than three out of the six years after college graduation. This choice to join the ROTC would change the lives of me and my family forever.  
==Life is unpredictable, Take advantage of opportunities knowing that it may not turn out the way you anticipated.==  
So this was it, we were going to war. The mission of the 854th Quartermaster Company, that I belonged to, was to provide fuel, water, and maintenance support to combat forces. By October 2001 Operation Enduring Freedom had begun; US and other nation’s forces were already on the ground fighting Al-Qaeda suspected to be behind the World Trade Center attacks and their Taliban supporters. Soon there would also be helicopters in the air providing transportation and air support. Those helicopters would need fuel, and an Army Reserve unit would distribute that fuel. That unit was us; or, them at least. When I presented myself for deployment I was hit with this response, ”You ain’t goin anywhere, Cadet!” ”We’re not going?” I asked confused. ”no, we’re going, You’re not going” That didn’t help. He continued. “See this contract? Read right here. You agreed to finish a bachelors degree, Cadet. It’s in your contract. You are non-deployable, Cadet. This fight will be long over by the time you’re done with school.” The multiple references to my status as a Cadet sunk in. A mix of emotions hit me. On one hand, I had trained for years for just this moment. I was no quitter, no coward. I couldn’t help feeling like I was abandoning my team. On the other hand, I felt somewhat relieved not to be going on such an uncertain assignment. Paige, only had one emotion, relief. She cried. She never wanted to marry someone in the military in the first place. When we first met she told me that my status in the Army was a deal breaker. It was our first date, but she was clear it wouldn’t go farther. I had made the same argument I used to convince her that the ROTC was a good idea, ”I go camping with my Army buddies on weekend a month. It’s not like I’m on active duty anyway. Besides, I’m in the Army Reserve, if I’m called up it’s World War III and they will institute the draft again and we’re all going. At least this way I would some training about what to do.” I had believed it. And it was significantly compelling as to convince Paige, She married me after-all, but she made it a point to frequently express that she was still uneasy about the Army. She had been unsettled about my joining the ROTC too. The fact that my contract with the ROTC kept me from deploying helped but not much. She didn’t like it one bit.  
Erik, on the other hand, my battle buddy who had got me through high school, who unintentionally convinced me to join the Army, who gave me great advice as a new missionary, he deployed, and I stayed home.  
Of course the war was not over before I graduated. Few would have predicted it would last 20 years. Fewer were the predictions of how it would end with us haphazardly leaving.  
==Not only are our own lives unpredictable the world stage is as unpredictable==. ==Which only further emphasizes the absolute need to take advantages of opportunities but be aware that it may not turn out the way you anticipated.==  
"We'll take Dan and you can have all the rest" Dan, the kid picked last, was apparently infinitely more valuable than the other three of us standing there looking around hoping we could play. We didn't even get called out by name, simply referred to as "all the rest". The choosing captain preferred to have us three burdens on the opposing team. The other captain shrugged, uncertain that a man power advantage was worth the liability we posed to his team, but agreed, consigned that if we didn't get in the way to much we could basically watch from on the pitch. People joke about being picked last for teams. As a kid, I would have loved to be picked last; that would mean I was picked by name at all. Once in a while I got to play by being unselected by the choosing side as an offering to the opposing team, as described above.  
Saying I was small and uncoordinated compared to my peers is a major understatement to how physically awkward I was. I wrote in my journal at the end of my sophomore year in high school, "I’ve grown 4 inches, I’m 5’4.” I would grow 7 inches taller in the course of the summer over the next few months. Then I truly was uncoordinated; barely able to figure out how to step over my own, newly enormous feet with my skinny legs. When I signed up for ROTC the Fall of 2001, I learned that the ROTC fielded a team for the Ranger Challenge Competition. Events included a physical fitness test (two minutes of as many push-up, followed by two minutes of as many sit-ups as one could muster, then a two mile run), an obstacle course, a one rope bridge, a land navigation course, and night land navigation course, and several mystery events that could include, first aid, radio communication, shooting, or any other Soldier skills, but would defiantly be physically taxing, all culminating in a 10 kilometer race with full gear and packs. I trained with the team, but made it clear that I wasn't trying to be on the team but was only there to get in shape. As the competition neared, the Captain of the team approached me, "We need you on the team", he said sincerely. I resisted. "You just need an alternate if someone gets hurt. I'm not that good". I protested. "We have an alternate." he insisted "We need you ON the team." I was shocked. I had never felt needed as part of a team before.  
We won the one rope bridge competition with a record time and held our own against other much bigger programs through every event. I was strong and our team was awesome.  
Despite success and demonstrated capability, I continued to compare myself against the most charismatic, the brightest, the strongest, and the fastest. I never quite measured up.  
While ==humility is a hugely important quality in a leader (more on that later)== confidence is equally important. And while comparing ourselves to our peers and aspiring for greatness is good, contentedness, recognition, and gratitude for what we have are equally necessary.  
==You are capable of so much more than you think you are.==  
A note to caveat this story. This was not an "all good news" event. My new bride was not thrilled that I was spending so much time with my Army buddies, doing “extra-curricular”, ”un-required”, ”goofing off”, things. Worse, I left her at home as I traveled to compete. I mention this here as a reference to previous lessons about regrets and balance. I don't regret the decision I made to participate, I feel that personally, on the whole, I have made the effort to balance competing priorities, BUT, I want to emphasize that ==what is good for you is not always what is good for everyone. Balance and understanding are required by all sides. Sometimes others make enormous sacrifices for us to be leaders; we should recognize them for that and also sacrifice at times for others to fulfill their commitments and passions.==  
I had attended Battle Assemblies with the same Quartermaster Company the entire time I was in the Army until I discovered something I should have already figured out. When I became an officer, I would be able to change my branch, or job. As a Cadet in the Army Reserves, I was more or less like a free agent. I could look for a unit I wanted to join. Excitedly, I looked into a number of options and ultimately decided what I wanted. I found C Company of the 321st Engineer Battalion. It only took one visit to know that I wanted to be a combat engineer. I would get to lead Soldiers and blow things up.  
==This is a tiny story but the lesson is hugely important: You have to actively look for opportunities. There are bigger and better things out there. Educate yourself on what those opportunities are.==  
==Insurance is a multi-trillion dollar industry. Individual companies spend billions of dollars each year, knowing that if we select their company we are likely to stick with it rather than change even for a better deal.==
 
My first Battle Assembly with C Company I was not as prepared to be a leader as they were prepared to make me a leader. A Soldier led the way for me through a big field next to the Reserve Center to a large dirt berm. On the other side of the berm I was surprised to see so many Soldiers preparing for a mock mission. "Here’s your platoon" he directed. 25 or so guys stood in a circle all looking at me. They acted as if they hung on my every word as I stammered through an on-the-fly plan. They showed confidence in me that I was unworthy of, and I felt it. We loaded into vehicles and began our mock patrol down a dirt road through the open field. I rode in a HMMWV with two 113 armored personnel carriers (APC) in front of me filled with combat engineers. Suddenly, as we passed a lone tree, a loud boom shattered the calm, routine feeling I had. A powder landmine exploded under the lead vehicle, followed immediately by the "pop, pop, pop" of gunfire as ambushers fired blank ammunition from the tall grass on the side of the road. I had not realized that we would run into any opposing forces (OPROR). I had thought we were just going to take a short drive around the site, practice convoy and radios procedures, and be done. Now we were under attack. I was overwhelmed. “What do you want us to do?” They asked me. I was the leader. But I panicked. I ordered the other two vehicles to go around the “disabled” vehicle. We sped around and out of the “kill zone”. I left them there, not knowing the extent of their "injuries". The scenario got worse for me as opposing force captured one of our Soldiers. They produced a rough note of propaganda demanding ransom, prompting a raid and the subsequent liberation of the incarcerated Soldier; not to be completed without a full fanfare return celebration. They laughed and high-fived. It was an insignificant training exercise. The rest of the guys were good sports about it. I am likely the only person there that still remembers it. But I didn’t celebrate. I was sick. That exercise impacted me so profoundly that it became one of the driving forces for writing this book. I had buckled under pressure. I had left a fallen comrades on the field of battle. I had failed. I still feel sick to think about it. I swore that I would never do such a thing again.  
==You don’t always get it right the first time. Practice everything you can before you do it for real… as always, learn.==  
==A second note, I’ve written some already about how critical it is for a leader to have the trust of those who follow. Trust can be increased in many ways, one of which is demonstrated competence, which can be build through multiple iterations with continued improvement.==   "If it's barely worth doing, barely do it." This was not the advice I expected to hear from my Professor of Military Science. All my life I heard things like. "Do your best" and "Put your best foot forward". Never had any leader or prominent figure ever told me, "do whatever you gotta do to get by." I was 23 years old, married, a father with another one on the way, going to school full time, working full time in the evenings until midnight, to get up for physical fitness training which started at zero 600, I was active in my church group and making time to visit the in-laws on the weekends, except the weekends I had Army Reserve Training. I was swamped. With that backdrop, here I sat in the historic brick building, headquarters for the ROTC department at Utah State, along 700 North, known as Aggie Boulevard. The cement floors and cinder block walls echoed the prestige of great military leaders who served their nation with honor through two world wars, Korea, Vietnam, and the Gulf War. Utah State was known as "The West Point of the West", so named for graduating more engineer officers during World War II than any other institution outside of West Point. Over 5000 cadets at one time marched the grassy area known as the "Quad". I studied in their shadow, I was the future of their legacy, And now, I was being told essentially to "take it easy"? I probably did look a little spent maybe even a little disheveled from the weight of it all but I was going to push through. Not giving 100 percent to every task was advice that didn't make sense.  
"Listen, I'm not telling you to give up on anything or stop putting forth effort. I'm just saying you can't be perfect at everything, There are only so many hours and only one of you." I stared back at him blankly. I wasn't getting it. "Look, you understand the principles of war," he asked, knowing that I was a fan of the Prussian General and military theorist Carl Von Clausewitz and his clarification and simplification of Sun Tzu, the Chinese general/strategists/philosopher's, Art of War. I nodded, not sure where this was going. "Explain to me, economy of force," he leaned back in his chair. "Economy of force means, only using the amount of forces necessary to accomplish the objective." I answered concisely. Right, he exclaimed pleased that I understood. "Why is it important?" He leaned forward as if to capture that I truly understood. "It's about efficiency," I began. Looking for clues that I was on the right track. He nodded and I continued. "The idea is, that if you commit more forces than are necessary to accomplish one particular battle you will not have sufficient forces to achieve the overall mission. To paraphrase Marv in the movie Home Alone, 'You may [win] the battle, little dude, but you [will lose] the war.' "exactly!" MAJ Curtis agreed, smiling at my reference but shaking his head that I shared it.  
"In economics the principle is known as opportunity cost. You don't have the time or resources to do everything, so your efforts on one thing my preclude you from doing something better. You have to learn how to bring your 'A' game to somethings, and that means, that for other less important things, sometimes good is good enough".  
==So that's the lesson: "If it's barely worth doing, barely do it." This can be an especially hard lesson for perfectionists who have a hard time seeing that 100% and 95% are both an A. and the diminishing return of the effort to get one more point may not be worth the cost. We all know quality when we see it and we appreciate craftsmanship. The point of this lesson is not to advocate for mediocracy, ironically it’s the opposite. Knowing which things to stop doing is just as important, if not more important, than your "to do list".== ==(Good to Great)== ==The principles of economy of force, law of diminishing return, and opportunity cost, all help us focus energy to be great.==
 
"Here are your things." The office administrator handed me a cardboard box. "Please turn in your badge. If you are missing anything, we will get it for you. Please do not talk to any of the students or try to talk to the teachers. Please leave the school property immediately." I had seen stuff like this on television, but this must be some kind of terrible April fools day prank. One glance at the security guard at my side told me no one would be jumping in to point out the hidden cameras. "What happened? Why?" I asked, "I don't understand." "If you have any questions you will have to speak to the student teaching representative at the University." "I can't talk to the teachers? I don't even know what's happening." "If you have questions you will have to speak to the student teaching representative at the University. I'm sorry that is all I can tell you." She just looked at me and shook her head back and forth as if to say, "I'm not telling you anything else so you might as well stop asking" But the head shaking felt more like I was a child who had broken something expensive while jumping on the furniture and an adult was towering over me shaking her head ,"for shame, Scotty, I thought better of you than this."  
Student teaching was my last step to graduation. Just the day before I was informed that I held the highest GPA in the program and would be graduating valedictorian for the College of Education. I was shocked. I had performed so poorly, to mediocre at best, in high school, that I was certain it was a mistake. But going from that high to this low, I fell hard. I drove home to the 48' x 10', 480 square ft trailer I called home and walked in the door. "What are you doing here" Paige asked as her smile turned to concern. "I don't know" I didn't clarify, "the office secretary handed me my stuff and told me to leave." I raised the box I carried slightly as a gesture that I wasn't crazy or making it up, see, here's the proof. "I don't understand," she stared. "Me neither" I stared back.  
The student teaching representative at the University was not much help either. She could only tell me that the teachers who I worked with at the school had recommended my removal. But there had been no warning, no indication that this was coming, neither teacher pulled me aside to say, "hey, I'm not really impressed, step up your game or I will recommend you not be a teacher" Neither of them had even said "hey, here are some pointers for improving your lessons". In fact, neither of them had said anything to me at all, aside from "hello", when I arrived. There was no due process. I couldn't address my accusers or even talk to the students to get feedback. I was devastated. I had a contract with the Army to Graduate. I had family invited to my graduation and commissioning. I had a class date for Engineer Officer Basic Course. I had a platoon counting on me to lead them on a deployment to Iraq in a year. I could not accept the fate of losing everything I worked for, for the last five years to end in a cardboard box of all my belongings. (yes, I was certainly on the slow track to graduate, it took me five long years.)  
I did the only thing I could think to do. I wrote a letter of appeal to the Dean. I will spare the boring details of back and forth. Sufficed to say, a board eventually convened. The board determined that I could redo my student teaching in the fall and graduate in December. With the end of the school year looming, and the evidence presented, this would have been a frustrating but understandable decision from the board, but for me, at that time, this would not do. I had to graduate. I could not wait around through the summer. My housing contract ended in a week. I could not lose my follow on course date in a couple weeks. If I didn't graduate I would breach my contract with the Army. I could have to pay back my scholarship, lose this chance to be an officer, and be out of a job. I was out of money, out of a house, out of time. I called the Dean and pleaded for an appointment. We met, despite her reluctance and busy schedule.  
I had not been afforded an opportunity to hear the arguments from the teachers who recommended my removal one week before the end of teaching and two weeks before graduation. I had not been able to plead my case in person. But none of that mattered. The board had made a reasonable ruling and nothing would change that decision. "I have to graduate" I told the Dean emphatically. I explained the circumstances rehearsed above. She sat back in her chair and for the first time in all of my meetings and correspondence with her, she softened her defensive posture. "If you don't complete student teaching, you can't get a teaching certificate…" She trailed off and looked at me to be sure I understood. "OK," I agreed to the obvious. "But you are not going to teach upon graduation.?" She stated, more than asked. "Correct," I agreed again. "So, what if you graduated with a degree other than 'Social Studies Teaching'?" "That might be ok" I replied thinking, then added quickly "but I don't know what degree that would be and it would probably take just as long, if not longer, to complete the requirements for a different degree program." "Maybe," she said with an idea in her eyes as she reached into a wide filing cabinet close to her desk and pulled out a few files. I sat quietly, unsure where this would lead but at least optimistic that she was listening and trying. "Here." she announced holding up a packet of papers. She handed it to me and turned her attention to the computer on her desk to look at my transcript. I read at the top of the packet, "Degree of Interdisciplinary Studies". I raised one eyebrow and looked toward the Dean. She was intently looking at the monitor. I shrugged and continued reading. "You have enough classes from the social studies department and from the college of education to meet the requirements for a degree in interdisciplinary studies of education and social studies." I remained quiet, still reading. She read on as well. "Except for a capstone project," she declared a little discouraged but not defeated. "What if we could work out a capstone project for you and you could graduate at the end of the Summer Semester?" It wasn't ideal, but it was a step in the right direction.  
Over the next two weeks I worked the hardest I'd worked in college. I walked at graduation. I commissioned as an officer in the United States Army. I moved my family, I started Engineer Officer Basic Couse half way across the country. And, somehow, I finished a capstone project. While technically my final grade was not posted until the end of summer, I made it work. It was stressful, I asked for a lot of favors, I was embarrassed and discouraged and determined and upset and relieved and so much more, but I was also done. It had worked out.  
==This was one of the hardest stories in the book for me to write. I do not like to fail and I had failed big here. I knew that I had not put forth a maximum effort into student teaching. In light of the last lesson, it may be clear why. Perhaps that is why they are back to back. Maybe it helps solidify that being distracted by other things can reduce the ability to excel at important things. I had plenty of reasons why my performance may have been shy of stellar. I was looking ahead. As mentioned, I had a few weeks to move my pregnant wife and two young kids and move myself to the Officer Basic Course. But all of those were excuses. The way it happened I believe was unfair. But I owned the part of my performance. I had never been so embarrassed; so embarrassed, in fact, that besides my wife, I told no one about this for 20 years, until I wrote this chapter. As with many of the other stories in the book, it has been personally therapeutic to tell, a lesson that should not be lost as it is a central theme for me telling my story. Many other good lessons come from this for me:==

1. ==Economy of Force means that you put forth sufficient resources to accomplish the objective. Putting a lot of effort into something, that is still ineffective, is a recipe for disastrous failure. (While this is an incredibly important lesson, the others have impacted me more deeply.)==
2. ==Be an advocate for yourself.==
3. ==Find the creative solutions that answer the root of the problem.==
4. ==The most important lesson is:== _when_ ==you fall, because it's a matter of== _when_ ==not== _if_==, pick yourself up, dust yourself off, and keep trying.==

==Scott Adams wrote a book about this very topic. Yes, the author of Dilbert comics. No, not a graphic novel. A serious read that is seriously worth reading called ”How to fail at almost everything and still be successful”==

There's some really cool research I read on luck, find it.