**Week 34 - Sep 09: Lightning from the Sky**  
_Theme: Directing Apaches (Force Multiplication)_  
[Chapter Eight: Part 2]  
In 2007 improvised explosive devises (IED) plagued Ramadi, Iraq. In the months before, route clearance teams found and removed hundreds of IEDs and many others detonated on coalition forces and civilians. Intelligence reports indicated that insurgents smuggled in munitions for the IEDs and stored them in caches north of the Ramadi in vicinity of the ==Thar Tha==r Dam. Due to the volume of IEDs and the continued reports of the caches 1st Brigade, 3rd Infantry Division launched Operation Lug Wrench II. 2nd Platoon, B Company, Task Force 321 Engineers, received the mission to clear a route for the infantry infill. The infantry unit received the mission to search for the caches.  
As a young Lieutenant I always found great joy and felt great importance attending the combined arms rehearsals for major exercises. It felt cool to be the one to stand on a giant map of the operational area and move the pieces around the battle space. This Battalion was doing everything right and I was a part of it, except, something was not quite right to me, and I couldn't figure out what. The operations officer briefed that five days were planned for the mission. Then almost immediately the Commander added a caveat that we might find nothing and the mission could be over in a day. At that remark several people in the room looked at each other and it was suddenly clear that from the leader on down, despite going through all the right motions, no one believed this was anything more than a waste of time. A single infantry platoon out of the entire battalion was designated to search for caches at three specific grid locations.  
Following the rehearsal I tracked down the leader of that platoon to see if there was anything we could do to assist them. We had extensive search experience and we were always eager to share what we could. He looked at me with the eyes of a teenager whose younger brother had just asked "can I help?" I asked questions about how the searches would be conducted and what equipment would be used. They had no equipment, no mine detectors, no training. He too, was skeptical of their mission. He expected to find nothing and return promptly that day or if necessary early the following day. He doubted the existence of the caches at all, and why wouldn't he? He was following the lead of his leaders.  
I walked out, head down, somewhat from discouragement at the lack of seriousness about the mission and in part because I was studying the notes I had made and devising a strategy for how we could make it better.  
"Hey, Second Lieutenant?" I looked up to see who called me by my full rank. I assumed it must be someone who thought themself important and was trying to demean my rank. "Are you the Platoon Commander for the Route Clearance team?" It wasn't that at all, it was a Marine Corps Captain. (Marines are accustomed to calling each other by their full rank.) "Yes." I answered puzzled. "Lightning from the sky" He sounded off. I guessed that meant he was happy to talk to me. "What can I do for you, Sir." I replied. "I'm from the ANGLICO (Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Company) for Lug Wrench, I'm looking for a place to ride for the operation and was told you might have space." Typical. We frequently had "ride alongs" on my patrols. The Buffalo was one of the safest vehicles to be in and with big windows and a high platform, it gave a great vantage point. So many people tried to ride with us that our Ops Sergeant put a "CAB rides" sign up on the door of our command post. "CAB Rides: Ride with 2B and get your CAB or your money back." CAB being short for Combat Action Badge. A badge received for direct engagement with the enemy. We were in constant contact through small arms fire, rockets, and IEDs. Far too often requests to ride with us were weak excuses to get fancy badges, a prospect we didn't appreciate one bit. It was meant to be a joke, but I didn't think it was funny at all, and repeatedly tore down the sign in disgust.  
"So can I count on you for a seat?" He asked directly "Sure, I guess." I didn't have a good reason why not.  
I returned from the combined arms rehearsal to brief my Platoon Sergeant and Squad Leaders. Immediately they detected my concern. We all concurred that we could not miss the opportunity to truly curb the flow of munitions into the city. If they wouldn't find the caches we would. SFC Hartman procured additional mine detectors from other platoons. Soldiers performed preventative checks and services on all equipment, and rehearsed searching techniques. We were ready.  
Somewhere around 2:00am, 2nd platoon left Trooper Gate of Camp Ramadi and headed East on route Mobil with two buffalos, two huskies - one towing a red pack (replacement parts) - three RG 31s, an EOD Cougar filled with explosives, a HMMT wrecker, and a fuel tanker. Our 10 vehicle convoy plus trailers made a number of wrong turns in route to the link up location in the middle of the dessert North of Ramadi. At one point we attempted to exit the highway only to run into an Iraqi Army security station with no exit and had to back up a quarter of a mile around a curve with steep banks on either side. (A quick shout out to those drivers who followed a leader only to be redirected.)  
At 0300 we finally arrived, somehow right on time, to our link up point, in what I considered to truly be nowhere. I did not see the company we were to link up with and exited my vehicle to look around. The night was clear and pleasant. I looked around and saw only dirt. I climbed a dirt berm to get a better vantage point from which I hoped to see Chaos Company. To my surprise, directly on the other side of the berm sat an entire company of M1A1 Abrams tanks nestle close together and anticipating our arrival. A soldier directed me to his commander. I spoke with “Chaos 6” briefly and he instructed me that we would begin movement in one hour, at 0400.  
As dawn approached we moved North toward Thar Thar. Out my window I could see Blue platoon consisting of 4 tanks echeloned out across the desert to the East. With Red platoon echeloned to our West in the same fashion. We formed a spear with my platoon at the tip followed by a long convoy of two infantry companies in our trace. It was an awesome force and I was at the front and center.  
"Do you want Air Support?" The ANGLICO riding next to me in the buffalo asked. "What?" I almost forgot he was there. "Air support. I can get Apaches to provide cover from the sky." I understood the question and I understood what it meant. I just didn't know I could just get it by asking. "So, what is it you do?" I asked. I guess I should have understood his capability sooner, but when he had told me he could coordinate with air support the reaction in my mind was, "Yeah, I have a radio and can talk to other units too." I hadn't understand. "Of Course I want air support!"  
As the sun crested over the dessert horizon I could see the distinct sound of rotors beating the sky growing louder from the South. "Where do you want them?" "What?" "What do you want them to do?" Again I had understood the question, I just didn't know I was calling the shots. Before I could process fully how to utilize them the pilot of one of the Apaches came up on my net.  
"Wolf 2-6, Joker 1-2 checking on station with two AH-60D Longbows, total of 2000 rounds of 30mm chain gun, 40each 70mm rocket pods, 8 hellfire missiles, and 1.5 hours of flight time. Requesting task and purpose, over."  
I tried to sound like I knew what I was doing.  
"Joker 1-2, Wolf 2-6, Task, check the route from here to the Thar Thar Dam. Purpose, identify suspected IED locations, suspicious personnel, or anything else out of the ordinary and report back, over."  
"Wolf 2-6, Joker 2-1 Roger, Task, clear North of the formation along this route and 50 meter to the shoulders from here to the Thar Thar Dam, Purpose, identify any obstacles, suspected IEDs, and any suspicious activity, over."  
"Solid Joker"  
He sounded so much cooler than I did.  
They pushed out to the West and made one big circle around us.  
Then up the road to the North out of sight. They were back in fairly short order. With their report and a request for a new task an purpose. I guess you can move pretty fast when not hindered by the ground.  
"Wolf 2-6 this is Chaos Red 1" "Go ahead Chaos Red 1" "Hey do you have contact with the Apaches? Over." "Affirmative, over." "Can you have them give us a heads up of any canalizing terrain they see out ahead? Over" "Will do, over" "TM, (thanks much) we will maintain our current formation unless you need us somewhere else. Just let us know where you need us." Did he just say to me “Just let us know where you need us?” I questioned myself.