**Chapter Five: Leaders Make It Happen**  
“What are we doing?” the team leader asked annoyed and impatient. “What does it look like we are doing? We’re standing here in the middle of the woods waiting to get dead, because no one knows what we're doing". I thought. Fortunately, this was a training exercise, so the threat of actual loss of life was not eminent. The scenario was made up but the frustration was real, and mounting quickly.  
It was fall of 2005, in the woods of Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. To qualify to be Engineer Officers we took turns serving as the leader of the platoon, and in various other leadership capacities, as part of a final field exercise/evaluation. In this particular scenario, the platoon leader, one of my peers in charge of 30 or so of us for that mission, gave a rushed brief, which I didn’t truly understand. Before I had any real sense of our task, we were loaded into big, open back, Army trucks, and shuttled down a dirt road. Fortunately, I found myself in the same truck as the platoon leader and I began a barrage of questions from which I got vague responses that didn’t answer basic concerns, like "where are we going?" and "what are we doing?" The truck stopped and we piled out. Well, slowly climbed out. Everyone seemed overly concerned about securing the ladder to the truck before we dismounted, despite the supposed tactical scenario. I followed suit with everyone else as we gaggled away from the trucks into the woods in what I determined to be a North-ish direction along the dirt road. I was unsettled. Despite being a squad leader, in charge of about 10 other lieutenants for this mission, I still had no concept of the plan or what my part in it would be.  
We halted and the platoon leader, gesturing vaguely into the woods ahead of us, said, "Your squad will cordon the South side. I will go ahead with the search team". I nodded that I understood. The rest of the platoon stumbled on a Northeast trajectory into the woods as I continued directly North with my squad until reaching a rise in the ground that provided some cover and, from which, I could see a small group of buildings in a horseshoe pattern surrounded by the dense Mark Twain National Forest on all sides. The dirt road we came in on continued North, passing by the West side of the “village”. I indicated to my squad that we would halt here. The remainder of the platoon gaggled for a while, then moved toward the buildings. I stared at the backs of their heads as they “maneuvered” into the woods closer to the village. My frozen stupor was interrupted by one of the Lieutenants acting as my team leader for the mission as he asked, “What are we doing?” I was as annoyed, confused, and impatient as he. But despite what I wanted to say, “What does it look like we are doing? We’re standing here in the middle of the woods waiting to get dead, because no one knows what we're doing". What came out of my mouth was something that surprised even me, “We are the southern cordon for this cordon and search mission.”  
“Where do you want my team?” he asked, seeming to have gotten the clarity and confidence he needed from my short, matter of fact, statement. I thought, “Who cares, just stand wherever you want, take a nap, eat a snack, it doesn’t matter, this is a stupid mission with no plan anyway.” What I said instead was, “Take the right side of my position and have the other team take the left side.” Not a complicated or inspiring plan, but direction just the same, which he executed swiftly without any argument or delay.  
A few minutes later my other team leader approached me, again braking my stare into the village where the platoon leader was "sneaking" up to people who could clearly see that he was there. The normally thick woods were bare of leaves in the crisp late fall air. A few months prior the brush would have concealed a company a few meters in front of them. Now, one could observe from hundreds of meters away. The fact that I could see into the village meant that they probably could see my position. But this Platoon leader, I guess, thought he was being sneaky.  
“Do you want us to block off the road?” the team leader questioned. Again my thoughts were less than helpful. “What we do out here isn’t going to make a bit of difference. Are you even watching this? We’re all going to die anyway.” instead, I again managed to make a confident decision and directed boldly. “We are the Southern cordon for this cordon and search mission. Can you cordon off that side without blocking the road?” I asked almost rhetorically. “No” he replied a little sheepish. “Then block it off.” I said bluntly but not to aggressively. I focused my attention back onto the group of Lieutenants nearest the people in the village. I was too far away to hear them but they seemed to be attempting to communicate with the ”locals”. I watched for some time before my focus was again broken; this time by a voice of someone with authority. I turned quickly to pay attention. “Lieutenant Sparrow, what the hell are you doing.” CPT V addressed me sharply. Here was my chance to express my complete disgust for this entire mission. I thought that I was going to say, “Sir, I don’t know what I’m doing. This mission was broken before it got started.” What I said surprised me again. “My squad is cordoning off the South side of this village, Sir”  
“What are you doing on the road?” He clarified, getting to the heart of his question. “Sir, we cannot cordon off the area if we are letting traffic in and out”. I said confidently. “Lieutenant, there is civilian traffic trying to get through and you have half a tree across the road.” At that, I looked toward the road, probably for the first time. CPT V had understated by describing it as "half a tree". It looked more like a whole tree to me. I don’t know where they got it or, more impressively, how they moved it there, but there it was, a huge dead tree across the entire width of the road and cars were piling up on either side. “Sir, we’re here to do the mission we were given to the best of our ability…”I began my defense. CPT V stopped me, took a breath, and looked seriously at me. “I get what your trying to do Lieutenant…I get it. You can’t block off the road." I took a breath to plead my case again. "It’s not in play.” he said over his shoulder as he began to walk away. The look on his face told me this was the end of our conversation. I told the team leader to move the tree, "We can't bock off the road" I instructed. He could see that I had just been defeated so didn’t bother to ask any questions. It didn’t matter anyway. Moments later the sound of gun fire came from the buildings. What followed was, as I predicted, a massacre of our platoon at the hands of a couple of guys running circles around us in the woods and though the buildings. The slaughter may well have included my squad as well, although we were holding our own when the call of "ENDEX" (end exercise) saved us definitively before we found out. ==That didn't matter to me. Nor is it the point of the story. I was deep in contemplation about what had transpired. In the lack of real guidance and despite my own lack of confidence in the mission, I had managed to instill confidence in those I led. I had managed to do the right thing and execute a successful mission for my squad. It was at that moment that I realized the power of a leader. If I had said what I was thinking, those thoughts in that moment would not have been helpful. Dwelling on the problem creates nothing but more problems. Dwelling on a solution and executing to the best of our ability resulted in mission accomplishment, at least for that short period of time. – Leaders Make it Happen==   With my family in Utah and me in Missouri, I spent time on two things, course work, and preparing myself physically for the Sapper Leader Course. According to the official website it is "a demanding 28-day leadership development course for combat engineers… training Soldiers in troop leading procedures, demolitions (conventional and expedient), and mountaineering operations. The course culminates in an intense field training exercise that reinforces the use of the battle drills and specialized engineer techniques learned throughout the course." (From \<[https://home.army.mil/wood/index.php/units-tenants/USAES/Sapper](https://home.army.mil/wood/index.php/units-tenants/USAES/Sapper)\>) The bottom line, it is grueling physically and mentally and I wanted to be ready. I trained hard.  
"Listen up." CPT V. announced in his permanently annoyed tone. He definitely had an unexplained chip on his shoulder about something. I think he simply had little desire to be training Lieutenants when he could be a company commander deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan taking the fight to the enemy rather than “babysitting”.  
"You are here to compete for the limited number of training slots this class will get.We don't know how many, if any, that will be. To be clear, you are here because you are choosing to be here. If at any point you change your mind. Just get up, get in your car, and drive away. I will see you in class on Monday morning and I will never say another word to you about walking away today. For the next unknown number of hours it is my job to help you make up your mind that you do not want to be here. If you need water, get it, otherwise, there is no reason for you to be doing anything other than exactly what I tell you to do. Unless you quit. In that case, by all means, do whatever you want to do. Are there any questions?" Everyone was silent, Each preparing in their own way for the torture that was about to ensue, each resolving in their own way how to cope. "Here we go," I thought. "Here we go." CPT V announced as if he read my mind.  
For the next hour we manipulated our bodies into all manner of strenuous contortions. It's amazing how exhausting getting up and down off the ground can be. "Front! (do push ups), Back! (do flutter-kicks), Go! (run in place). Low crawl! Beat your boots, "Front!... Back!… Go!" Lay on your back and hold your feet six inches off the ground "six inches!"  
Great beads of sweat like rain on a windshield accumulated and ran down my face stinging my eyes, and down my back. My clothes clung to my skin like a drier sheet. I longed for my canteen, not more than 20 feet away.  
If only I could get some water, I felt like I could be reborn and gain a second wind. Suddenly I remembered what CPT V had said. "If you need water, get it, otherwise, there is no reason for you to be doing anything other than exactly what I tell you to do." That was it, my ticket to get a water break. I contemplated it through a few more flutter-kicks.  
Then I couldn't stand it any longer. He had clearly said, "if you need water, get it," and I needed water. I was going for it. I stood up bravely and moved with purpose in a straight line to my water source.  
"What are you doing?" CPT V snapped  
"You said we could get water if we needed it." I replied hoping I could remind him of his statement that would make this ok.  
"I know what I said. I'm not asking what I said, Lieutenant. I'm asking what you are doing."  
This was already not going well "I'm getting water," I sounded back and kept moving  
"Getting water?" he questioned in an upset tone.  
"Yes." I replied. I was committed.  
"Yes, what?"  
"Yes, Getting water" I said now less confident in what I was doing.  
"How about, Yes Sir, Getting water, Sir."  
"Yes Sir, Getting Water, Sir!" I sounded back quick, loud, and crisp. Crap, I suddenly understood his tone. I might have gotten away with this if I had simply answered the question asked and said "Sir". I was especially mad at myself now for getting singled out. I grabbed my canteen and took a drink. It was cool, but not as refreshing as I had imagined. I was anxious to get back and blend in with the misery of everyone else. I sensed that wasn't going to happen.  
"You like water, Sparrow?" CPT V asked loud and smug as I screwed on the lid and scrambled to get back to my place in formation.  
"Yes, Sir." I announced with outward confidence. Internally I knew this was not going to go well. Somehow I knew I was about to get proverbially water boarded. There was another Cadre there that day, Sergeant First Class Colman, who continued to drill the other Lieutenants. But his memory is merely a shadow as CPT V had zeroed in on me. This day was not going to go well.  
"How about you bring that five gallon water jug over here and hold it up in front of you as a reminder of how much you like water?" he grinned a devilish grin. "Yep, Lieutenant Sparrow luuuuves water." he stretched out the 'Luuuuves', "Anyone else like water?" no one dared make eye contact.  
The next five hours were a blur. At one point I do remember someone joined me in holding that water jug. We found that if we locked our arms together by holding each other's wrists, it was actually possible to hold it up without too much effort. We tried to look strained but CPT V realized to quickly that he was not inflicting nearly as much pain as he desired and we moved to other torturous inventions. (==There's a team work, synergy lesson in there but it’s not the moral of this particular adventure)==  
At noon the announcement was made, "Alright, you have exactly one hour to get something to eat and rest before the fun begins again. If you don't want to do this anymore, just don't come back and enjoy the rest of your Saturday. For the rest of you masochists, I will see you back here in one hour."  
Several people just didn't come back. Me, I came too far not to be committed. "Here we go," I thought as CPT V approached again. "If you came back you are in the running." He announced to our shock. "Put your name on this list. Good work. Get a shower. We will see you Monday." Fortunately for us, the test was over for the day. But there would be plenty of others. (==There’s a ”don’t give up your closer than you think” lesson in here as well, but that’s also not the moral of this tale)==  
"We step off at zero four tomorrow morning. Not arrive a four. Not put your pack on at four. We step off at four. Anyone not there is automatically removed from the list." I set 3 alarms and told a buddy to check on me to make sure I was up and ready. We met in the hall on our way out. "You ready, Sparrow?" "Ready as I'm gonna get." I tried to sound motivated as we stepped out into the cool morning. You couldn't really call it morning; It was in the 3's, this was the middle of the night.  
It was uncomfortably cool now but once we got started we couldn't ask for better weather. It would be a 12 mile ruck march. The standard in the Army is less than 3 hours, but this was not just a race against the clock, it was a race against the other competitors. I had checked my pack at least ten times, paranoid that I would cross the finish line only to be disqualified for missing some insignificant item at the pack check following the race. "There will be no helping, pushing, or pulling other Lieutenants along. I don't even want to see you talking to anyone. Is everyone clear?" everyone nodded "Are there any questions?" If there were no one was awake enough to ask.  
"30 seconds" I checked my watch, 0359:30. He wasn't kidding. "Ready…" 5 seconds on my watch, "Go!" We stepped off across the asphalt parking lot but were soon on a dirt road. There are a number of strategies for this type of event. Some simply speed walk for 12 miles. Not only is that much slower for me, to walk fast for that long is killer on my calves and shins. Others adopt an alternating run for a set time, then walk for a set time, approach. For me the first mile is critical. It sets the tone for the event. It is almost always my goal to jog the first mile, unless it's all uphill and impractical to do so. Beyond that, as a general rule, I run the downhill and walk the uphill. The flat is the most challenging for me. I can't keep up running the entire time. If there are landmarks, such as telephone poles, I adopt a common strategy of running the distance between a set of poles then walking the next distance between the next set of landmarks and repeating.  
The dirt road ran mostly downhill from the start. One mile passed. I felt good as I stretched into a walking stride and looked behind me for the first time. Maybe a handful of people were ahead of me. Two more came up behind me as I slowed to walk for a moment. I started to jog again and passed them. We continued to leapfrog each other for nearly half a mile as they alternated between running past me and slowing to walk as I jogged past them, until a long downhill stretch for the next mile put me significantly out in the lead. The course turned right onto a hardball road and flattened out. I kept relatively motivated for the next couple miles one pole at a time, jogging and then walking until the road turned right again and I began a steady climb that I could hardly walk up, let alone run. The next mile was the toughest in the race. Climbing so vertically at times that I felt like I could reach out my hand and touch the road in front of me. I just kept putting one foot in front of the other. The road wound upwards and I could see I was steadily gaining on someone. Then he stopped all together and looked as though he might fall over backwards.  
"You ok, Johnson." I spoke almost in a whisper as I passed.  
"I can't move forward." In his eye's I could feel his panic.  
"Just keep putting one foot in from of the other" I tried to encourage, a little paranoid CPT V would step out and tell me I was disqualified for somehow aiding someone. He never made it any farther. Despite a great start, Johnson was eventually picked up by the cleanup van, with the top of the hill literally around the next bend.  
The course beyond the hill seamed to go on forever. My feet hurt. I could feel my toes slamming into the fronts of my boots. I could feel the heat of friction as blisters formed on the pads of my feet. I didn't dare stop. The more it hurt, the harder I pushed, trying to end it as quickly as I could. I crossed the finish line with no fanfare. I'm not sure how many crossed before me. At some point it wasn't about them anymore. It was about me beating me. Overcoming the urge to stop, take off my boots, and rest. I had done my best and I was proud of that.  
The toenails on both of my big toes went black. One fell off. I couldn't stand to wait and see if the other would meet the same fate, so I didn't wait, I ripped it out. It was painful, but they grew back. Blisters healed. Runs never felt easier but they got longer and faster. Five months of rigorous training later I was in the best shape of my life. Finally, Cadre posted the long awaited order-of-merit list. There I was, number four! I continued to be surprised at the confidence others put in my abilities. The two dive school slots were quickly snagged by the top two lieutenants. The third, Lieutenant, Tool, chose Ranger School. Those were awesome training opportunities, as were Airborne and Air Assault school (jumping from air planes and rappelling from helicopters) but I did not hesitate, I wanted Sapper Leader Course. I was already at Fort Leonard Wood. I already had a school seat. I was already trained and ready. All I needed were orders to keep me there. But orders never came. Had I better understood the process, had I known the right people to talk to, had I ensured the administrative things were in place, had I learned better from my own previous lesson to be a bold advocate for myself, I could be wearing the prestigious red tab with all capital, white block letters that reads "SAPPER". Instead I went home, my head down, discouraged and disappointed. Adding insult to injury, my parents later told me they had planned to attend my Sapper School graduation. Other than my commissioning, they had not attended any of my Army milestones of promotions or training graduations. I wanted desperately to please them and have them be a part of my life. I shared some of the highlights of my preparation in hopes to express a glimpse of the effort exerted only to come up short. 15 years later, now too old and broken to make it possible, I still covet that red SAPPER tab. I was devastated. Worse, I had no plan. I felt the familiar emptiness I felt coming home from a mission. After five months of focus, I struggled with the transition. I sulked around for the next few months feeling sorry for myself. I didn't get a job, I didn't really even look very hard. Over the previous five months I had made more than I had made in my entire life combined, to that point. I didn't want some lame job. I had a degree. I couldn't slave for pennies. Besides, I would deploy in a few months and a regular job is not what I was looking for. Faced with an exacerbated wife and mounting bills, I finally signed up to substitute teach in the local school district. It was insult to previous injury, but it was somewhat flexible, more importantly, I had a house payment to make, with three kids to feed and sorrow wasn't putting food on the table.  
==Have a plan, Have a contingency plan. Especially for the transitions. I have a good friend with a doctorate degree in elementary education. PhD, is not sufficient to describe her skill with holding the attention of rambunctious kindergarteners or adults. The secret, she taught me, is in the transitions. That space between one activity and the next, is critical. She is a transition ninja. Unfortunately at that time in my life, I was not. I swore I would not be left without a transition plan again. It has made me more successful and given me greater peace of mind.==  
"Come here, Lieutenant!" The Battalion Commander screamed. He was stern and never happy anyway, but he looked exceptionally pissed off. His eyes bugged out of sunken sockets reminding me of Judge Doom, the villain played by Christopher Lloyd in the 1988 film "Who Framed Roger Rabbit". Traffic piled up as a crane operator maneuvered jersey barriers into a traffic control point my platoon was establishing. I was running from place to place, flitting really. Lieutenant Higgins, the Company executive officer (XO), had dubbed me the hummingbird for good reason. Questions were coming from all sides. "Where do you want the wire?" "Do you really want those barrios there?" "We can't see around this corner, can we push our security up farther?" "Someone is watching us from the top of that hill; do you want us to go check it out?" "These people are not happy that we stopped traffic; can we let them go around until we get set up?" "Now that our security is in a position where we can see down the road, we no longer have visual contact with the rest of the group; what do you want us to do?" This was not going well and I didn't have time to appease the additional barrage of unhelpful questions I didn't have the answer to, from the Battalion Commander. What was he doing out here anyway? Did I mention this was not going well? Spoiler alert. It didn't get better. "Damn it Lieutenant, get over here!" I ran to him and snapped to attention. I would have saluted but we were in a field training exercise and It's not a good idea to alert the enemy as to who the leader is. Although, it would have been obvious from the next county away with his entourage milling around him and his peacocking about. "What are you doing, Lieutenant?" He spoke my rank as an insult. "Our orders are to establish a traffic control point here, Sir." "I know what your orders are, Lieutenant. They came from my staff." He spoke to me in an arrogant condescending tone, "I'm asking what you are doing?"  
I tried to clarify, "We have stopped traffic from the North and South along this route." I pointed, "Security is pushed out over there, and down there. Jersey barriers are being emplaced to create a search area down there. Concertina wire is being emplaced to create a serpentine to slow down traffic entering the search area." From our vantage point on the side of the hill we could see for miles, I pointed out the elements of the chaos unfolding below us. The high desert sagebrush didn't block any of the landscape and we could see vans, food trucks, semi-trucks, motorcycles, Humvees, and other military vehicles, piling up, easily over a hundred all together and more mounting. We were disrupting a lot of people's day and those with rank and authority were not happy. The observer controller trainer (OC/T) approached us coming up the hill with my platoon sergeant stepping to keep up hot on his heels. "Not all these vehicles are in play." He declared. "You can't block off the entire road" (This sounded familiar) "Well, how are we supposed to tell who we are supposed to stop and who we aren't?" I asked frustrated. "Those who are supposed to stop for the scenario will stop," the OC/T tried to reassure "but for the others, you have to create a bypass." "How do we know that those in the scenario won't just bypass the checkpoint with a claim that we didn't set up a good checkpoint?" I countered "We will take care of it," he assured again. The Battalion Commander looked at my Platoon Sergeant and said, "take care of it." The Platoon Sergeant glanced at me and I gave a slight nod. "Yes, Sir," he said to the Commander, spun on his heel, and was gone back down the hill with the OC/T. Traffic was already maneuvering around the crane. Radio news travels fast. I turned to look back at the Commander. I generally get along with everyone. I try to keep an open mind but this guy rubbed me the wrong way. He was incredibly knowledgeable about all things Army Engineers from construction to minefields but route clearance was new to the Army and as new to him. I had attended the Route Clearance / Route Reconnaissance Operator Course and then the Route Clearance / Route Reconnaissance Leader Course earlier that year. I think he was a little uncomfortable, as a leader, having subordinates that knew more than he did about the mission. But, this was not a route clearance mission and I wasn't impressing anyone with my knowledge or ability to lead. I was about to get a big slice of humble pie "Lieutenant Sparrow" he started again, still upset but slightly less condescending. "I am asking what YOU, the platoon leader, are doing. You, running around here frantic, are not instilling confidence in your platoon nor in your leaders. You appear disorganized and frankly you look like you don't have a clue what the hell you are doing" That was true. I didn't know what I was doing.  
We had been at the National Training Center in Fort Irwin, California, for over a week training for our upcoming deployment to Iraq where we would conduct route clearance operations. Route clearance is really a simple (not necessarily easy) task, go ahead of other units, find and clear explosive obstacles. After arriving and in-processing at NTC and getting our gear and vehicles ready we began STX, situational training exercises (pronounced "sticks"). In that time most of our missions were route clearance related, but we didn't have the right equipment to truly clear routes, so most of our missions were more like presence patrols through the dessert. If we did find something, we spent hours in the Mojave sun waiting for an explosives ordnance disposal (EOD) team to come take care of it. The only thing we were honestly training on, was patience. After a particularly long and frustrating time of eating the dust from the vehicle in front of me and wondering just how this was getting my platoon and me ready for combat, it was already dark when I got back to the Company command post (CP). "You have a TCP mission tomorrow," my buddy, and fellow platoon leader, informed me as I approached. "Ok," I shook my head as if I understood. But I didn't understand. "TCP, what does that stand for?" I wondered. "Here’s your order for tomorrow's mission" SFC Bamog handed me a piece of paper as I entered the tent. "Traffic Control Point, why are we doing a TCP?" I asked. "Because you might have to do it in Iraq." CPT Johnson chimed in proudly as if it was his idea. CPT Johnson was a tanker before becoming an engineer. He was easily the most tactically savvy officer I had worked for in my short carrier to that point. He didn't care for me much. "Here is some reference material. Brief me on your plan in one hour." "Roger, Sir" I responded crisply. "Oh boy, a whole hour, Thank you," I thought sarcastically. The one page order read more like a wedding invitation, than an order.  
"Mr. and Mrs. Governor and Military Leader are pleased to announce the presence of terrorists smuggling explosive material along route Iron. We respectfully request the presence of 2nd Platoon B Company at the provided grid location AB12345678 to provide a traffic control point in their honor. As a party favor, a tractor trailer carrying six Jersey barriers, and 15 rolls of concertina wire will be sponsored by the 123 logistics company. Link up with them at date/time (the next morning) to provide escort."(ok that's not exactly how it was written, but pretty close.) I looked at the grid on the map. It was hard to miss. The main asphalt road went out from our location due North for several miles across the flat high dessert until it passed along the side of a substantial hill in the middle of the large valley where the road turned to the North West and continued straight for several more miles. Easy, drive 'til you get to the hill with the bend in the road. The material the CO (Commanding Officer) gave me described the process for standoff in order to provide security and escalation of force if needed. Again, easy, drive to the hill with the bend in the road put out some wire, stop traffic, search the vehicles, and send them on their way. I huddled quickly with my team and gave them a heads up. A few of my Soldiers had attended a search course and had some working knowledge of how to perform the mission but we had never done it full scale before, and we had never set it up. They were always up for a challenge and it wasn't driving aimlessly through the desert the next day, so they were on board. I gave a quick brief to the CO, mostly regurgitating the little information provided in the order and the material he provided me. I understood the concept but honestly did not have a grasp of how it would unfold. I was hungry and tired. I managed to scrap together a few left-overs from the cooks who had long since stopped serving dinner chow by that point and laid down on my cot. Soldiers stirring around me rustled me awake. "Crap, we gotta figure out this link up with the Jersey barriers and wire." were my first thoughts. Fortunately, for all of us, my Platoon Sergeant was out late and up early coordinating supplies. We jumped in our vehicles and were off to the hill at the bend in the road. "Here's the grid." the lead vehicle commander announced as we slowed. "Let's get set up." I declared and jumped out.  
The scene was chaos in action. Soldiers tried to stop traffic. Capable vehicles ignored the blockade and bypassed the pileup by swinging wide out around us through the desert. Suddenly a thousand questions that I didn't have the answers to, were directed at me. "Are we supposed to stop all of these vehicles?" "What about military vehicles?" "What if they don't stop or try to bypass?" "Are we supposed to use escalation of force on our own forces if they don't comply?" Tension mounted and the presence of the Battalion Commander (BC) did not help. He had more questions. "Where is your Platoon Leader?" "He's around here somewhere." an unsure Soldier proclaimed. "I think he's showing them were to put the wire," another Soldiers tried to be helpful. The BC spotted me energetic, motivated, running around and summoned me.  
The BC lectured me about not remaining in a central location where people could find me; where I could receive and disseminate information. "Officers don't run" he scolded me. "Officers are calm in the chaos." I wasn't sure he was right about officers never running, but his sentiment was right. The leader must be in a position where he/she can make decisions and instill confidence. The greater lesson for me was swarming in my mind. This chaos could all have been avoided if I, as the leader, had spent more time working and communicating a clear plan. I looked around. The traffic control point was coming together with little help from me. Planning and rehearsals could have saved us a lot of headaches. I should have anticipated questions and addressed concerns before we got to this point. As I stood there receiving my verbal reprimand, a puff of white powder spilled out of the vehicle at the center of the control point, a simulated explosion. The call of MASSCAL came over the radio. A MASSCAL or mass casualty situation is one in which injuries overwhelms the medical personnel at the scene. This was a disaster, a potentially avoidable disaster, and I led us into it.  
==The leader has to be calm under pressure. Confidence can be bolstered through knowledge and preparation.==  
==Most importantly the leader has to== **anticipate**==. That means a big portion of a leader's time on mission or project is in the planning and preparation. Sometimes that means working long hours, especially in the beginning to anticipate questions anticipate problems resources solutions and provide clear intent that can then be executed without you overseeing the minute details.==  
Between the rotation to the National Training Center and mobilization station I spent six weeks at the Explosive Ordinance Clearing Agent Course, which I will forever claim makes me an agent. The first three weeks of the course were academically rigorous and several Soldiers failed out. By studying together with the cohort from my unit, we all made it through together. Once we maneuvered past the initial gauntlet, the second half of the course was a blast, if you will excuse my pun. We spent the next three weeks at the demolition range operating robots and blowing stuff up. It was a grand time and we were mentally and physically more ready than we had ever been to do our job overseas. Emotionally, however, I was growing somewhat restless. I remained in contact with the company commander and the preparations continuing with the rest of the unit in my absence. The commander maintained a hyper aggressive attitude, revealing his wolf Pack motto "Prey to Kill!". While I fundamentally understood that the military is in the business of killing people and I understood that literal survival for myself and for my team meant confronting and engaging the enemy, I was uneasy about taking a deliberate gory, slasher, scorched earth approach. I had called my dad on a number of occasions. As is obvious by now, he mentored me abundantly throughout my life and continues to be a great mentor, but by his own admission, this was uncharted territory for him. "How do I maintain innocence at war?" I asked directly "I don't know the answer to that, son." he conceded. "But you know who you could call? Rich Stewart." Six houses down on the left a little more than a mile West from where I grew up in the house at the bend in the road, the flag of the United States of America flew straight out most days in the southern Idaho wind at the unassuming home of Lieutenant Colonel Retired Rich Steward. A helicopter pilot and instructor, LTC Stewert had been recalled to active duty for his skill at training pilots.  
I called him. "Sir, this is Lieutenant Scott Sparrow, Marv Sparrow's boy. How are you, Sir?" "Lieutenant Scott Sparrow, your dad told me you might call. I'm well. How are you?"  
We exchanged a few more pleasantries then I got right to the point. LTC(Ret) Stewart was direct but kind, candid and thoughtful. His comments and our conversation changed nothing more than my resolve to do what I already knew I had to do to execute the mission, but now with hope that I could remain human. For me, at that time, that was huge.  
==The leader is the moral compass. Every Soldier, Sailor, Marine, Airman, has some autonomy to make ethical decisions. Each, when faced with the reality of combat, must make the decision to pull the trigger or not. But the leader got them to that battlefield and informed them what the enemy looked like. To heighten the stakes, the enemy is trying to kill before being killed. The bottom line is, even if he/she is wrong about everything else, the leader has to be right about what is right.==  
==A more obvious lesson here is about the power of a mentor. Find a mentor, encourage others to find mentors, encourage others to be mentors, you be a mentor. Good mentors are those with similar experiences and/or interests, who have made it to where you want to be. It is not always great to follow money advise from broke people, unless they are telling you what not to do. It seems there are an over abundance of people who want to give advise who don’t have first hand experience and thus probably have no idea what they are talking about. The best mentors are also good listeners, capable of recognizing that the path they took is not the only possible route and not necessarily the best route for others to follow.==  
By the time I reached Fort McCoy WI again, my platoon, along with the rest of the Battalion, was already there. I hit the ground and reported to the company area. My first order was to unload the semi-trailer which had just arrived from Hayden Lake, ID (near Spokane, WA) where the company had loaded it with personal gear before jumping on a plane and flying to Fort McCoy. I was motivated. I was ready to get back with my platoon and knock this job out. I walked up as the truck was backing up to the building where I presumed this stuff was going. "Hey, Lieutenant Sparrow is here!" said a loud cheerful voice from a gaggle of 2nd Platoon Soldiers as I approached. "Platoon, Attention!" another voice sounded, crisp and clear. They snapped to attention, sitting Soldiers stood, everyone fell silent and looked to me, their leader. My Platoon Sergeant saluted, "Welcome to the party, Sir" He smiled. I returned the salute, "Thanks, it's good to be here." I greeted. We shook hands. "At ease, at ease" I directed everyone. They all relaxed. "How's everyone doin'?" "Hoah!" they replied, shaking their heads up and down. This was the last stop before deployment. They were ready to get busy, get trained, and get down range.  
The truck stopped with a loud release of air from the breaks. “Make a line!" I hollered to everyone. "Let’s get this done!” I was in charge and everyone listened, forming a line from the back of the truck into the building. I threw open the back door of the trailer and started pulling stuff out. “Let’s get this stuff moved!” I said, as I cleared a path of stuff and climbed into the truck. I was not afraid to work hard and my platoon respected me for it. I threw big black boxes one after another, never stopping. I working up a steady stream of sweat but continuing to work quickly. I yelled motivations like “we’re doing great” and “keep it up”, "half way" I pushed hard and fast. “Last one,” I hollered. I threw my hands up like a calf roper, “we’re done,” I climbed out of the truck and shook hands with the driver who commended us on unloading so quickly. I smiled proud of myself and my team. I followed the last box into the building for my first look at what was going on inside. What I found were boxes stacked everywhere. It was a bit of a disaster. Boxes facing whatever direction they were set down. Boxes on an old chest freezer. Boxes staked around other junk in the room. Then I noticed something for the first time, despite having handled almost every box. Some of the boxes had blue writing on them, some had white, others had red. “Does the red, white, and blue writing mean something?” I asked.  
“Those are our platoon colors.” Someone told me proudly, “1st Platoon is red, 2nd Platoon is white, 3rd Platoon is blue.”  
“What’s in the Boxes” I wondered out loud.  
“Our personal stuff. There’s one for you in here too, Sir.” A Soldier said, looking around realizing it would be a challenge to find it.  
“ Oh", I paused, "We’re not going to have to get in these boxes are we?” I asked, afraid for the answer.  
“Yeah… we will…” was the hesitated trailed off response.  
I was devastated. This would never do. If I needed to get into my box it would be impossible to find, and even if I could find it, I would have to unbury it from under the other boxes. I stood surveying the damage. It was too small of a room and too big of a mess to simply shuffle the boxes around. “We’re going to have to take it all back out again,” I said in a low tone. "What?” someone close to me said, not wanting to have heard what was said. “We’ve got to take it all out and start over. We can’t get to each box the way it is now… TAKE IT OUT!”, There was little attempt by anyone to hide their contempt. "What?" Why?" "Are you serious?" came the quotable complaints, among mostly expletives. As we took out the boxes I put one squad leader in charge of sorting the boxes by color/platoon. Once the boxes were out, which took much longer than putting it in due to fatigue and frustration, it revealed a disastrous room. I assigned another Squad leader to clean out the junk and sweep the floor. “Ok, now bring them back in,” I assigned the third squad leader to arrange the boxes in the room. "Ok, I want Blue along that wall, two boxes high with the names and the openings facing away from the wall," He directed. "Leave a two foot space for a walkway and stack the other blue boxes two high with the openings facing toward the walkway… Now I want Red on the opposite wall, two high, openings facing away from the wall. Make an isle equal to the other side with the red boxes. Now, create two rows of white boxes with the backs against the other boxes down the center of the room.” It looked great. It was accessible with room to maneuver. It was easy to find the box you were looking for, and easy to get into it. At most you would have to move one box to get what you wanted. My platoon previously motivated and inspired were tired and had lost confidence in their leader. Boxes had to be moved three times because the person in charge, me, did not do a good job as a leader. ==As important as it is to have a leader who is willing to get their hands dirty and work; it is the critical role of the leader to have foresight and assign subordinates to responsibilities. Leaders have to step back, look ahead, plan, and direct accordingly. Leaders most see the whole picture otherwise they make bad decisions and give bad orders.==