**PHASE 9: THE SURGE (The Grind)**  
**Week 37 - Sep 30: Fifth in Order of March**  
_Theme: Managing Up (Fighting to be first)_  
[Chapter Nine: Learn]  
In June of 2007 with the troop surge in full swing in Iraq and with Al Anbar a much calmer place, the battalion commander selected my platoon to go to an area south of Bagdad that had not been occupied by coalition forces sense the beginning of the conflict. Insurgents used the area as a route to smuggle explosives up the Tigerus River and into Bagdad. Arriving just in time for the combined arms rehearsal, I burst into the tent with a bit too much bursting. The briefer paused. All eyes turned to me. I diverted my eyes with a sheepish look and gave a tiny wave. The briefer continued without further hesitation, someone handed me an order / concept brief, and I sat down in a metal chair near the front. I scanned through the document. A year before this would have been a daunting read to understand the background, forces involved, the enemy posture, enemy capabilities, and likely attack plan. I skimmed it rapidly, digesting acronyms, abbreviations, short hand, maps, graphics, and other symbols with ease. But I didn't find me. I didn't find my team. Where was the route clearance? I set down that document and turned my attention to the other document given to me that contained the order of battle. I should be right there, near the top, as the lead ground element to clear the route, but I was not there. Nor was I attached with some other security force. There, at the bottom, fifth in the order of march, after all combat forces and just before the logistics units, I found a note for engineers. I raised my hand. "Why is the route clearance team 5th in the order of march." I asked when finally called on to speak. Everyone stared, then looked around for someone else to answer. I didn't think I asked a dumb question. Someone from the plans section finally said with mustered confidence, "to make sure the route is cleared for the follow on logistics elements." Everyone nodded to show approval for the answer and the brief continued. But I was not at all satisfied.  
After the brief I cornered the Platoon Leader from Alpha Company designated to be first in the column. "What's your plan for finding and reacting to IEDs?" I interrogated. He showed me a plan for where he would dismount troops and how his lead Bradly fighting vehicle would scan the road. It's exactly how I would have done it if I had to do it with the same equipment and people he had. It was a good plan, except one thing, he didn't just have the tracks and guys on his team, he had the ability to use a route clearance team. I tried to convince him that he had other assets at his disposal but in true, can do, this is my mission and I'm going to do it the best I can, infantry fashion, he shrugged it off. I spoke to the Battalion Intel officer to get a better idea of what types of resistance and what types of devices we would encounter. I put in my plug to him about us clearing ahead of the other forces. "Sounds good to me." he shrugged. He was not the one that needed convincing. He didn't have authority to make the change. I tracked down the plans officer who put the plan in writing to plead my case to him about sending the clearance unit first. He was bright and listened but his experience with route clearance had been that they kept major lines of communications, main supply routes, and logistics corridors open after combat forces conducted initial kinetic operations. He was doctrinally not wrong. But I was suggesting another way. I talked to a half a dozen people each time introducing myself, describing the equipment in my formation explaining our capability, and then unpacking the concept of sending the element that has the capability to detect and disable explosive devises first in the operation. All seamed mildly interested in the sales pitch but ultimately understood better and were more comfortable with the status quo. Changing their rehearsed techniques felt uncomfortable. Changing things this close to kick off seemed, to them, ill advised. Discouraged I still hadn't shared the information with my platoon. I knew the reaction they would give, "5th in the order of march? What are we even here for?" I made my way to the chow hall dejected. In route a First Sergeant approached me. "Are you the route clearance platoon leader?" he inquired. "Yes, First Sergeant." "I'm the Alpha Company First Sergeant he introduced himself then got right to the point. "Why are we going first? Why aren’t you up front?" Finally, an advocate. We redirected to the Alpha company command post and spoke to the company commander and platoon leader both of whom I had already addressed my concern and proposal. We approached the operations officer and the Battalion Commander. Both agreed with the assessment. The change was made and 2nd Platoon B Company took point. The operation was a huge success. The 1-30 established a new combat out post and Tactical Operations center without injuries and without a shot fired.  
As a leader you have to know what your team is capable of and sometimes you have to sale to your boss or others what you can and cannot do, or more importantly, how best to use you and your team to accomplish his mission and intent.  
Sometimes it takes more than one try to convince others, and many times it is a matter of finding the right person to be your advocate to help plead your case.