**Week 23 - Jun 24: The Box Room Fiasco**  
_Theme: Logistics, Planning, & Measure Twice_  
[Chapter Five: Part 5]  
By the time I reached Fort McCoy WI again, my platoon, along with the rest of the Battalion, was already there. I hit the ground and reported to the company area. My first order was to unload the semi-trailer which had just arrived from Hayden Lake, ID (near Spokane, WA) where the company had loaded it with personal gear before jumping on a plane and flying to Fort McCoy. I was motivated. I was ready to get back with my platoon and knock this job out. I walked up as the truck was backing up to the building where I presumed this stuff was going. "Hey, Lieutenant Sparrow is here!" said a loud cheerful voice from a gaggle of 2nd Platoon Soldiers as I approached. "Platoon, Attention!" another voice sounded, crisp and clear. They snapped to attention, sitting Soldiers stood, everyone fell silent and looked to me, their leader. My Platoon Sergeant saluted, "Welcome to the party, Sir" He smiled. I returned the salute, "Thanks, it's good to be here." I greeted. We shook hands. "At ease, at ease" I directed everyone. They all relaxed. "How's everyone doin'?" "Hoah!" they replied, shaking their heads up and down. This was the last stop before deployment. They were ready to get busy, get trained, and get down range.  
The truck stopped with a loud release of air from the breaks. “Make a line!" I hollered to everyone. "Let’s get this done!” I was in charge and everyone listened, forming a line from the back of the truck into the building. I threw open the back door of the trailer and started pulling stuff out. “Let’s get this stuff moved!” I said, as I cleared a path of stuff and climbed into the truck. I was not afraid to work hard and my platoon respected me for it. I threw big black boxes one after another, never stopping. I working up a steady stream of sweat but continuing to work quickly. I yelled motivations like “we’re doing great” and “keep it up”, "half way" I pushed hard and fast. “Last one,” I hollered. I threw my hands up like a calf roper, “we’re done,” I climbed out of the truck and shook hands with the driver who commended us on unloading so quickly. I smiled proud of myself and my team. I followed the last box into the building for my first look at what was going on inside. What I found were boxes stacked everywhere. It was a bit of a disaster. Boxes facing whatever direction they were set down. Boxes on an old chest freezer. Boxes staked around other junk in the room. Then I noticed something for the first time, despite having handled almost every box. Some of the boxes had blue writing on them, some had white, others had red. “Does the red, white, and blue writing mean something?” I asked.  
“Those are our platoon colors.” Someone told me proudly, “1st Platoon is red, 2nd Platoon is white, 3rd Platoon is blue.”  
“What’s in the Boxes” I wondered out loud.  
“Our personal stuff. There’s one for you in here too, Sir.” A Soldier said, looking around realizing it would be a challenge to find it.  
“ Oh", I paused, "We’re not going to have to get in these boxes are we?” I asked, afraid for the answer.  
“Yeah… we will…” was the hesitated trailed off response.  
I was devastated. This would never do. If I needed to get into my box it would be impossible to find, and even if I could find it, I would have to unbury it from under the other boxes. I stood surveying the damage. It was too small of a room and too big of a mess to simply shuffle the boxes around. “We’re going to have to take it all back out again,” I said in a low tone. "What?” someone close to me said, not wanting to have heard what was said. “We’ve got to take it all out and start over. We can’t get to each box the way it is now… TAKE IT OUT!”, There was little attempt by anyone to hide their contempt. "What?" Why?" "Are you serious?" came the quotable complaints, among mostly expletives. As we took out the boxes I put one squad leader in charge of sorting the boxes by color/platoon. Once the boxes were out, which took much longer than putting it in due to fatigue and frustration, it revealed a disastrous room. I assigned another Squad leader to clean out the junk and sweep the floor. “Ok, now bring them back in,” I assigned the third squad leader to arrange the boxes in the room. "Ok, I want Blue along that wall, two boxes high with the names and the openings facing away from the wall," He directed. "Leave a two foot space for a walkway and stack the other blue boxes two high with the openings facing toward the walkway… Now I want Red on the opposite wall, two high, openings facing away from the wall. Make an isle equal to the other side with the red boxes. Now, create two rows of white boxes with the backs against the other boxes down the center of the room.” It looked great. It was accessible with room to maneuver. It was easy to find the box you were looking for, and easy to get into it. At most you would have to move one box to get what you wanted. My platoon previously motivated and inspired were tired and had lost confidence in their leader. Boxes had to be moved three times because the person in charge, me, did not do a good job as a leader. As important as it is to have a leader who is willing to get their hands dirty and work; it is the critical role of the leader to have foresight and assign subordinates to responsibilities. Leaders have to step back, look ahead, plan, and direct accordingly. Leaders most see the whole picture otherwise they make bad decisions and give bad orders.