**14 - Apr 22: Leading from the Right**  
_Theme: Humility & Leading while following (Elder Searls)_  
[Chapter Four: Part 3]  
I moved to my second area and with five months in the mission field I became the senior companion. My junior companion, Elder Searls, had been there but a month and had disliked much of it. He spoke with a bit of a drawl that came through his budding Spanish. People didn't always understand his words but they could feel the sincerity from his heart the size of Texas, where he was from. On my first day with him I had him show me everyone and everything he knew. At the end of a long day we walked back to the concrete box we called home. As we passed a particular house he said, "I think we should talk to the people at that house". “OK” I said and I walked toward it. “Right now?” he asked astonished. “Did you have another time in mind?” I asked rhetorically. We stood to the gate looking at each other for a bit. I finally said, as if he should have already known, “Well, it’s your house.” He tapped on the gate with a large coin and hollered “Upe”; as is costmary in Costa Rica. A woman came to the door and introduced herself as Joana. Together we set an appointment when we could return to share a message with her. Elder Searls floated home that evening. When his feet did touch the ground, they danced every step. That day I had allowed him to be the teacher, to show me. I hadn’t done it because I read it in a book, which now you have, so you have no excuse not to. I had done it because I was able to admit that, just because I was in charge didn’t mean that I knew everything, which was easy because I knew hardly anything. Not knowing is not weak for a leader. Not learning is weak. And not using the knowledge of those you lead is silly. You will be a better leader when you listen to, and learn from, the wealth of knowledge held by those you lead.  
A month later Elder Searls left the area and Elder Stoker, strait from Washington, arrived. His thick beard that darkened even a freshly shaved face didn't hide how young he was. He wanted desperately to be a good missionary but he was inexperienced, nervous, and very homesick. I had not realized how much basic training had prepared me not to worry too much about being homesick. I never worried much about moving to a new place. I didn't know how to relate. So I did what I knew how to do: work hard, and follow the rules. Elder Stoker and I worked hard. We literally ran at times in slacks and ties to get where we needed to be. That didn’t leave much time for doing much else, including being homesick. I learned that I work harder and I strive to be better when someone is watching and learning from me. This may not be the case for everyone but when I am running alone I am much more prone to slow my pace or shorten the distance without someone there to hold me accountable. I am especially more likely to step up my game if a young person is running with me that I feel is watching me as an example. What I didn’t appreciate at that time was the reality of depression and anxiety. While I am happy it worked out, and I am a big proponent that hard work can solve a lot of problems, it is important to recognize in your subordinates, peers, and even superiors mental states that may require professional assistance.  
Missionaries typically have a handful of companions over the course of their mission. I had 16. I generally get along with others and figured I could be companions with anyone. But in my first zone conference there was a missionary in attendance who seemed hyper, spastic, and borderline unprofessional. I thought to myself, “I hope I’m never companions with that guy.” Well, sure enough, fate, irony, and a God with a sense of humor, or a need to teach a young punk a lesson, could not pass up a chance to make that happen. Elder Carrias was from Guatemala. He was an odd duck, but he had a big heart and truly cared about people. We eventually learned to work very well together and I learned to appreciate his enthusiasm.  
Not everyone thinks, looks, or acts the way you do. That does not make them a poor candidate for your team. Diversity and an open mind can lead to unique solutions. Shared vision and effort on all parts go a long way toward understanding and ultimately success.  
In the mean time, I wrote home to my father for advice and guidance. He served as a missionary in England 20 years earlier and I hoped for some words of inspiration and encouragement. What I got was a letter that made me so angry that I did not write to him directly for months. He told me that he was concerned that I was not receiving enough trials to shape me into the man he knew I could be. He confessed that he had been praying that I would have hardships and trials that would challenge me. “Well thanks a lot Dad”, I thought. It would be many months before I could forgive him for wishing ill upon me, as I saw it. What I realize now, is that the difficult things we pass through in life make us stronger… and they make for good stories. Much like lifting weights builds muscles, challenges builds character and resilience.