**Week 15 - Apr 29: The Adult in the Room**  
_Theme: Emotional Maturity (Elder Bell)_  
[Chapter Four: Part 4]  
After serving for nine months, my mission president called me to be a district leader, responsible for several missionary companionships. Two months later he called me to be a zone leader; this came with responsibility over several districts. Mission presidents typically have one or two missionary assistants who over-see all the zone leaders in the entire mission.1 While not applied for, or generally sought after positions, it is an honor and privilege to be an assistant to the president (or AP). I served as zone leader for 3 months when Elder Hicks, the former assistant to the president, came to be my companion for the last few months of his mission. I never mentioned it to Elder Hicks, but I felt like the president sent him to groom me to be the next AP. I felt like I was fast tracking to the top. A few months later I had the humbling experience of being called to be a district leader again. This brought with it the most challenging times in my mission. I was paired, on two occasions, with missionaries who were not as motivated about the work as I was. It can be difficult to be away from home. It can be difficult to talk to people. It can be difficult to do the same work and get much of the same rejection every day for two years. But that rejection and work and longing can be softened and made bearable by having someone with whom to share the burden. Loneliness can be a great challenge even when you are surrounded by others; even when you are in charge. Loneliness is real.  
Lesson re-learned, eventually: sometimes moving to positions "in charge" of more people is not the best way to use your skills. I had the opportunity to train more new missionaries, which was, by far, the most rewarding times for me. As mentioned before, I worked harder knowing others were looking to me as the example. Again, promotions do not always equal being the boss of more people. Connected is the fact that reward does not always equal dollars. While money is an important motivator. Most of us are motivated by doing what we are educated, trained, good at, and hired to do.  
Elder Joshua Bell was athletic, tall, handsome, charismatic, likable, and many other things I only dreamt of being. He had turned down an opportunity to play professional baseball to be a missionary and as his first companion and trainer I felt responsible to make his sacrifice worthwhile, but he required little coaching. He was naturally outgoing, a skilled teacher, and even his Spanish was progressing impressively. We worked hard and had a lot of fun. Late one evening at the end of a particularly unsuccessful day of canceled appointments and rejection, we knocked on the door of a gentleman whose curt attitude didn't help the mood. Elder Bell returned the sentiment, being a little short with him. I followed suit. The door closed and I stated the obvious, "Well, that didn't go well." Elder Bell looked at me with disappointment in his eyes, "You didn't do anything to make it better" he retorted. I got a little defensive. "That was your door" I shot back. "Yes, But you are the trainer" He chastised me. Saying that I should have made an effort to change the tone or at least leave the man at the door with a good impression and a pleasant experience rather than leaving on a sour note. It was a long quiet walk home from the far edge of our area as I tasted humble pie for the whole 45 minutes. He was right and I made sure he knew, that I knew it, when we arrived at our doorstep.  
You are the leader. You don't have to be a "party pooper" or a "fun hater" but you do have to be the adult in the room. This has been a particularly difficult lesson for me at times when I desired to join the pity party and act like a martyr. While I may desire to pout like a two year old or blame everyone but myself like a teenager, as a competent capable adult, I have to remind myself that, it may take work but I, especially as a leader, possess the power to make situations better.  
With the end of my two year mission visibly approaching on the calendar I reflected on the attitude and effort, in their final days, of the missionaries who I had seen depart ahead of me. I determined that on my last day I would say “goodbye, I’m going back home.” and I wanted them to be shocked and unsuspecting because I had never mentioned how close I was to going home. This is a tiny note that will likely be insignificant to most readers, but for me, this is a major part of who I aspire to be. I want to be known as someone who runs through the finish line, fights to the end, doesn’t quit, is not a giver-upper.