**Apr 08: Be Where You Are**  
_Theme: Blue Ocean Strategy (5AM showers)_  
**[Chapter Four: None of it Works Unless You Do]** I had one goal as a young boy. I grew up in a very religious home. Young men in my faith are expected to serve as missionaries for two years, if they are at all able, at age 19. (Now they can serve at 18. Young women may also serve.) That is what I wanted to do. At eight years old my parents opened a savings account for me and one for my older sister. I saved every bit of the money I earned for that far off mission I would someday serve. Receiving one’s mission call is an exciting time. Once an application is submitted candidates wait for their call that could assign them almost anywhere in the world. I was more than excited to learn that I would be at the Missionary Training Center (MTC) for ten weeks to learn Spanish and then off to serve in the Costa Rica, San Jose Mission for two years. As a missionary, I quickly became known as one who followed the rules, even in the MTC. (Missionaries are assigned partners called companions. Male missionaries use the title "Elder" and female missionaries are called "Sister".) It helped immensely to have a companion at the MTC as dedicated to the mission as I was. The first day at the MTC our instructor asked which of us had taken any Spanish classes. The 11 other missionaries in my district raised their hands. I was the only one with no Spanish schooling. This frightened and motivated me. My companion and I would get up at 5:00 am, one hour before the required 6:00 am wake up time. We did this for a couple reasons. We lived on third floor of a building where all missionaries got up at the same time every day. Which meant that, hundreds of people were trying to use the showers at the same time. Besides being crowded, the hot water would quickly run out, especially on the top floor. You could actually hear when the water went cold by floor as the yips moved down the building of those caught with their pants down. Once all these young men showered and dressed, they all went to breakfast… at the same time. The line rapped the building hall, outside, and down the sidewalk. Elder Welling and I discovered that by waking up early, we could enjoy a hot shower in an un-crowded bathroom, get dressed, and be down to breakfast as the doors opened, sparring us the wait in line. This opened the floodgates to not just the hour of extra time for getting up early but almost an entire additional hour to study. And what we felt we needed to study most was Spanish. ***Time is a limited resource. If you are vigilant you can find better ways to maximize this critical commodity.** The program for learning a foreign language at the MTC includes the critical element SYL, Speak Your Language, or HSI, Habla Su Idioma, in Spanish. Elder Welling and I determined to do just that. It was hard, and caused some contention when others were not as strict as us with the program, but ultimately our hard work paid off. Those who expressed that they would learn the language when they got to country were disappointed that it didn’t get any easier. Many of them, even after two years, did not have a command of the language. The best advice I received before entering the MTC was from my good buddy Erik, the guy who talked me into joining the Army. He was older than me by a few months and passed on a few simple, but powerful, words of wisdom in a letter from where he served in the Philippines. "When you leave for the MTC you are not leaving for Costa Rica" he wrote. That seemed obvious enough. He continued "I left so excited to get to the Philippines that I missed some great opportunities to learn." I was fortunate to learn from someone else and I did not share the same regret. **This is a hard lesson to learn for a motivated leader. Patience is part of it, but it is not simply the ability to wait it out. Leaders must take advantage of situations to the fullest. Corporate training, for example, can appear to be a waste of time when you have "real work" to do. Avoid the urge and tendency to blow it off. Take advantage, it is worth it. The other lesson is that, if you have feedback don’t keep it to yourself. Share it with those to your left and right. If you get feedback, pay attention. Making mistakes is costly. Making mistakes after you are given the answers, is costly and dumb.**
 
For my first assignment in Costa Rica, I found myself paired with a missionary from Honduras. It is typical for missionaries to have a companion missionary to work alongside. My companion would teach me everything from where to get breakfast and catch the bus, to how to teach and serve with love, but he did not speak English and, as much as I had studied, I truly did not speak Spanish. It would be a challenging experience. In addition to miles of walking and talking to hundreds of people, Elder Ventura drilled me constantly on my gringo accent. “Roca, piedra, turunca,” he repeated. I attempted again and again. Before long, locals began to ask where I was from. I didn’t always understand their questions nor was my vocabulary truly up to the point that I could explain it when I did understand, but my accent had improved to the point that many people were convinced that I was a native Spanish speaker. That is until they heard me speak more and my limited vocabulary and faulty grammar gave me away.  
The President the mission interviewed all of the missionaries one on one every couple of months to gage their wellbeing and provide individual counsel. In my first such interview about a month after I arrived the President started something like this “Elder Sparrow," he said looking me in the eyes, "eres un buen misionaro” (Elder being my missionary title.) “Elder Sparrow, you are a good missionary” he complemented me in Spanish. “Gracias presidente” I said back with my fresh gringo accent, feeling pretty good about myself. He looked at me, squinted his eyes slightly, and brought his eyebrows closer together as he shook his head from side to side “pero no eres un misionaro excelente. Nesesito que seas un misionero excelente. Entiendes?” (”But you are not an excellent missionary. I need you to be an excellent missionary. Do you understand?”) I shook my head up and down. I did understand, but I was devastated. He proceeded to provide me with some specific areas to improve. I understood basic principles but lacked a deeper knowledge of scriptural text and doctrine. I obeyed the mission rules but fell short of keeping my thoughts and actions consistent with a representative of a supreme power. President Gonzalez gave me some specific areas to study and actions to demonstrate maturity. That verbal gut punch motivated me to work harder and be better. My dad had told me in the first letter he wrote to me at the MTC “There are many motivational words of encouragement but none of them work unless you do”. I determined to work hard and become a misionaro excelente.  
Don’t be afraid to let someone know when they need to step up their game. Slackers and high performers alike respond to sincere, directed, constructive feedback. Those who do not respond to constructive feedback fall into the category discussed previously that should be removed from the organization as to not drag down the team. This is of course a balance. I am not at all suggesting the constant pointing out of faults and specifically discourage belittling, yelling, or attempting to motivate through passive aggression. Complements and encouragement are better motivators but we often think that because we see the specific deficiencies that they must be obvious to the one committing them. Shown the path to success most of us will be happy to get on that road.