**Week 18 - May 20: The Box of Shame**  
_Theme: Failing Student Teaching & "Barely Do It"_  
[Chapter 4.5: Part 3]  
"If it's barely worth doing, barely do it." This was not the advice I expected to hear from my Professor of Military Science. All my life I heard things like. "Do your best" and "Put your best foot forward". Never had any leader or prominent figure ever told me, "do whatever you gotta do to get by." I was 23 years old, married, a father with another one on the way, going to school full time, working full time in the evenings until midnight, to get up for physical fitness training which started at zero 600, I was active in my church group and making time to visit the in-laws on the weekends, except the weekends I had Army Reserve Training. I was swamped. With that backdrop, here I sat in the historic brick building, headquarters for the ROTC department at Utah State, along 700 North, known as Aggie Boulevard. The cement floors and cinder block walls echoed the prestige of great military leaders who served their nation with honor through two world wars, Korea, Vietnam, and the Gulf War. Utah State was known as "The West Point of the West", so named for graduating more engineer officers during World War II than any other institution outside of West Point. Over 5000 cadets at one time marched the grassy area known as the "Quad". I studied in their shadow, I was the future of their legacy, And now, I was being told essentially to "take it easy"? I probably did look a little spent maybe even a little disheveled from the weight of it all but I was going to push through. Not giving 100 percent to every task was advice that didn't make sense.  
"Listen, I'm not telling you to give up on anything or stop putting forth effort. I'm just saying you can't be perfect at everything, There are only so many hours and only one of you." I stared back at him blankly. I wasn't getting it. "Look, you understand the principles of war," he asked, knowing that I was a fan of the Prussian General and military theorist Carl Von Clausewitz and his clarification and simplification of Sun Tzu, the Chinese general/strategists/philosopher's, Art of War. I nodded, not sure where this was going. "Explain to me, economy of force," he leaned back in his chair. "Economy of force means, only using the amount of forces necessary to accomplish the objective." I answered concisely. Right, he exclaimed pleased that I understood. "Why is it important?" He leaned forward as if to capture that I truly understood. "It's about efficiency," I began. Looking for clues that I was on the right track. He nodded and I continued. "The idea is, that if you commit more forces than are necessary to accomplish one particular battle you will not have sufficient forces to achieve the overall mission. To paraphrase Marv in the movie Home Alone, 'You may [win] the battle, little dude, but you [will lose] the war.' "exactly!" MAJ Curtis agreed, smiling at my reference but shaking his head that I shared it.  
"In economics the principle is known as opportunity cost. You don't have the time or resources to do everything, so your efforts on one thing my preclude you from doing something better. You have to learn how to bring your 'A' game to somethings, and that means, that for other less important things, sometimes good is good enough".  
So that's the lesson: "If it's barely worth doing, barely do it." This can be an especially hard lesson for perfectionists who have a hard time seeing that 100% and 95% are both an A. and the diminishing return of the effort to get one more point may not be worth the cost. We all know quality when we see it and we appreciate craftsmanship. The point of this lesson is not to advocate for mediocracy, ironically it’s the opposite. Knowing which things to stop doing is just as important, if not more important, than your "to do list". (Good to Great) The principles of economy of force, law of diminishing return, and opportunity cost, all help us focus energy to be great.  
"Here are your things." The office administrator handed me a cardboard box. "Please turn in your badge. If you are missing anything, we will get it for you. Please do not talk to any of the students or try to talk to the teachers. Please leave the school property immediately." I had seen stuff like this on television, but this must be some kind of terrible April fools day prank. One glance at the security guard at my side told me no one would be jumping in to point out the hidden cameras. "What happened? Why?" I asked, "I don't understand." "If you have any questions you will have to speak to the student teaching representative at the University." "I can't talk to the teachers? I don't even know what's happening." "If you have questions you will have to speak to the student teaching representative at the University. I'm sorry that is all I can tell you." She just looked at me and shook her head back and forth as if to say, "I'm not telling you anything else so you might as well stop asking" But the head shaking felt more like I was a child who had broken something expensive while jumping on the furniture and an adult was towering over me shaking her head ,"for shame, Scotty, I thought better of you than this."  
Student teaching was my last step to graduation. Just the day before I was informed that I held the highest GPA in the program and would be graduating valedictorian for the College of Education. I was shocked. I had performed so poorly, to mediocre at best, in high school, that I was certain it was a mistake. But going from that high to this low, I fell hard. I drove home to the 48' x 10', 480 square ft trailer I called home and walked in the door. "What are you doing here" Paige asked as her smile turned to concern. "I don't know" I didn't clarify, "the office secretary handed me my stuff and told me to leave." I raised the box I carried slightly as a gesture that I wasn't crazy or making it up, see, here's the proof. "I don't understand," she stared. "Me neither" I stared back.  
The student teaching representative at the University was not much help either. She could only tell me that the teachers who I worked with at the school had recommended my removal. But there had been no warning, no indication that this was coming, neither teacher pulled me aside to say, "hey, I'm not really impressed, step up your game or I will recommend you not be a teacher" Neither of them had even said "hey, here are some pointers for improving your lessons". In fact, neither of them had said anything to me at all, aside from "hello", when I arrived. There was no due process. I couldn't address my accusers or even talk to the students to get feedback. I was devastated. I had a contract with the Army to Graduate. I had family invited to my graduation and commissioning. I had a class date for Engineer Officer Basic Course. I had a platoon counting on me to lead them on a deployment to Iraq in a year. I could not accept the fate of losing everything I worked for, for the last five years to end in a cardboard box of all my belongings. (yes, I was certainly on the slow track to graduate, it took me five long years.)  
I did the only thing I could think to do. I wrote a letter of appeal to the Dean. I will spare the boring details of back and forth. Sufficed to say, a board eventually convened. The board determined that I could redo my student teaching in the fall and graduate in December. With the end of the school year looming, and the evidence presented, this would have been a frustrating but understandable decision from the board, but for me, at that time, this would not do. I had to graduate. I could not wait around through the summer. My housing contract ended in a week. I could not lose my follow on course date in a couple weeks. If I didn't graduate I would breach my contract with the Army. I could have to pay back my scholarship, lose this chance to be an officer, and be out of a job. I was out of money, out of a house, out of time. I called the Dean and pleaded for an appointment. We met, despite her reluctance and busy schedule.  
I had not been afforded an opportunity to hear the arguments from the teachers who recommended my removal one week before the end of teaching and two weeks before graduation. I had not been able to plead my case in person. But none of that mattered. The board had made a reasonable ruling and nothing would change that decision. "I have to graduate" I told the Dean emphatically. I explained the circumstances rehearsed above. She sat back in her chair and for the first time in all of my meetings and correspondence with her, she softened her defensive posture. "If you don't complete student teaching, you can't get a teaching certificate…" She trailed off and looked at me to be sure I understood. "OK," I agreed to the obvious. "But you are not going to teach upon graduation.?" She stated, more than asked. "Correct," I agreed again. "So, what if you graduated with a degree other than 'Social Studies Teaching'?" "That might be ok" I replied thinking, then added quickly "but I don't know what degree that would be and it would probably take just as long, if not longer, to complete the requirements for a different degree program." "Maybe," she said with an idea in her eyes as she reached into a wide filing cabinet close to her desk and pulled out a few files. I sat quietly, unsure where this would lead but at least optimistic that she was listening and trying. "Here." she announced holding up a packet of papers. She handed it to me and turned her attention to the computer on her desk to look at my transcript. I read at the top of the packet, "Degree of Interdisciplinary Studies". I raised one eyebrow and looked toward the Dean. She was intently looking at the monitor. I shrugged and continued reading. "You have enough classes from the social studies department and from the college of education to meet the requirements for a degree in interdisciplinary studies of education and social studies." I remained quiet, still reading. She read on as well. "Except for a capstone project," she declared a little discouraged but not defeated. "What if we could work out a capstone project for you and you could graduate at the end of the Summer Semester?" It wasn't ideal, but it was a step in the right direction.  
Over the next two weeks I worked the hardest I'd worked in college. I walked at graduation. I commissioned as an officer in the United States Army. I moved my family, I started Engineer Officer Basic Couse half way across the country. And, somehow, I finished a capstone project. While technically my final grade was not posted until the end of summer, I made it work. It was stressful, I asked for a lot of favors, I was embarrassed and discouraged and determined and upset and relieved and so much more, but I was also done. It had worked out.  
This was one of the hardest stories in the book for me to write. I do not like to fail and I had failed big here. I knew that I had not put forth a maximum effort into student teaching. In light of the last lesson, it may be clear why. Perhaps that is why they are back to back. Maybe it helps solidify that being distracted by other things can reduce the ability to excel at important things. I had plenty of reasons why my performance may have been shy of stellar. I was looking ahead. As mentioned, I had a few weeks to move my pregnant wife and two young kids and move myself to the Officer Basic Course. But all of those were excuses. The way it happened I believe was unfair. But I owned the part of my performance. I had never been so embarrassed; so embarrassed, in fact, that besides my wife, I told no one about this for 20 years, until I wrote this chapter. As with many of the other stories in the book, it has been personally therapeutic to tell, a lesson that should not be lost as it is a central theme for me telling my story. Many other good lessons come from this for me:

1. **Economy of Force means that you put forth sufficient resources to accomplish the objective. Putting a lot of effort into something, that is still ineffective, is a recipe for disastrous failure. (While this is an incredibly important lesson, the others have impacted me more deeply.)**
2. **Be an advocate for yourself.**
3. **Find the creative solutions that answer the root of the problem.**
4. **The most important lesson is:** _when_ **you fall, because it's a matter of** _when_ **not** _if_ **, pick yourself up, dust yourself off, and keep trying.**