**APR 01: THE TREADMILL FACTORY** _(Text: Chapter Three - Part 6)_
 
After Basic Training I went home for a few months and began a job at Icon Health and Fitness making treadmills on a production line. I worked on a team with one other person. She would start the treadmill for the first time, checking functionality. I would put on the back roller and then adjust the belt. It was at my station that any issues with the machine were often discovered for the first time. When something had a problem, the machine was moved off the production line and onto the “mechanics loop”. The mechanic would fix the issue and move it back onto the line or assemble the machine alone before sending it through the quality control booth. I quickly learned that I could fix many of the issues myself without sending the half assembled machine off to be someone else's problem. I also discovered that by doing so I could save a lot of time in the production process. I found, for example, that if a bad batch of circuit boards were put into the treadmills that the workers putting in circuit boards simply continued to put them on and it took a long time before the problem was finally cut off at the source. If I identified the issue, I could stop bad circuit boards from being put in, quickly change out those already on the line and keep production running.
 
My line leaders saw in me an ability to work independently and when a position came available to bring parts to the line I was offered the parts puller job. I enjoyed very much being off the grind of the line. I also made a few more cents an hour, a big perk for me as I was working to save money. With me off the production line, the mechanic became inundated with machines. No one was willing to step outside of their wrote production script. When he became overwhelmed and quit I was offered his position. I was initially reluctant but found that I could be bought for a few more cents an hour. I simply trained a few key people on the line what things to watch out for and empowered them to fix the issues before they got to me. Things ran so smoothly that I started assisting where there were bottle necks on the line. I didn’t do all of this unselfishly. Although I do enjoy helping others and fixing processes; we worked for piece rate. That meant that the more treadmills we made in a night, the more money we made. With the production line running smooth and everyone energized to make more money, quality control seemed to be the greatest hold up. So, I again was offered a few more cents an hour to work QC. Then after only a few short months, I got to be a lead in charge of a couple people for a special project. I don’t recall exactly what the circumstances were but I do remember one of the people on my team thinking I was too harsh and crying. When the project we were working on ended I went back to quality control and was not asked to continue in a lead position. I enjoyed my job and continued to make good money for me and the team. I learned many lessons from this experience
 
1- Seek for ways to help the team. Similar to the lesson form a previous story about helping individuals, Look outside of what you are doing to make the organization better. Often times you will be rewarded for your efforts.
 
2- As a leader, look for those who can make your team or organization better and put them in positions to do so, which may include a promotion.
 
3- Some people are born leaders, others have to work at it. Either way there are skills and attributes that can be learned. Otherwise books like this one would be useless. I clearly had to work at it. I had the potential. Which I recognize in myself as I look back and think about how I influenced others. But leading is more than motivating.
 
4- (this lesson came up again) not everyone is ready now but it does not preclude them from being ready later, especially with training or experience.
 
5- People are often promoted one level higher than their capability. Great workers do not always great leaders make. Give yourself some wiggle room to test those you promote and don’t be afraid to put them back to doing something they are good at or finding ways to use their skills in conventional ways and to reward in unconventional ways. Promotions don’t have to mean being in charge of more people.