**Week 36 - Sep 23: Krier’s Pile of Dirt**  
_Theme: Intuition & Thin-slicing_  
[Chapter Eight: Part 4]  
Krier  
"6,3 hold up" "Roger 3, all stop" The call came from the security vehicle, the last in the column, as we made our way Southeast across a wide expanse of dessert on all sides. We had left the aqua blue lake at Thar Thar with a few buildings huddled close to the precious source of water and followed south along a big cannel for a few miles. Now we could really only see dirt on every side. Had they spotted someone suspicious through their optics. Maybe, but the Abrams tanks, echeloned far out across the expanse, had far better optics than anything we had. The radio was quiet for a while. I was curious, as was everyone, about why we were stopping. I resisted the temptation to ask, knowing from experience that asking questions at this point would only frustrate those working to solve some challenge and delay the most accurate report. Maybe they had a problem with their truck. Maybe they just wanted to see how long I would last without getting curious and asking. That sounded like something they might try. It could be a thousand things. I could wait. I had a rule, anyone could stop the patrol, at any time, for any reason. Route clearance is dangerous and you should never assume that the truck in front of you would have seen what you see. In other words, if you see something, say something. I would also say, we’re not in a hurry, we have the rest of our lives to find it. The rear truck rarely halted us and I was happy to accommodate when they did. It seemed like an eternity, although it was probably close to 30 seconds, when they called back again. "6,3" 3,6" "6 we have some dirt back here that my gunner says doesn’t look right, over" "The dirt doesn't look right? Over" That's what we stopped for, dirt? That's all there was out here, dirt and more dirt. "Roger, he says the dirt doesn’t look right, break, request permission to check it out, over" "Roger, do you want the buffalo back there? over" "No 6, we are just going to hit it with the mine detectors. 3‘s on the deck." For the next two hours SGT Krier's team extracted dozens of munitions from an inconspicuous pile of dirt on the side of the road. SGT Krier, who in his regular life, when not in his superhero Army uniform, was a mild mannered equipment operator and self proclaimed dirt mover, was as expert as they come in piles of dirt. An entire Platoon of seasoned professionals at finding munitions had one by one slowly passed by that benign pile of dirt among a great expanse of piles and piles of dessert dirt. But SGT Krier had seen something more than dirt. It's impossible to know for certain how many Improvise Explosive devices would have come from that pile of dirt or how many lives he potentially saved that day.  
Speak up about what you know  
Listen to those who speak up.  
Chances are the people you lead are a lot smarter and more proficient at their tasks than you are.