==This is your part not mine.==  
==Lehi, a great prophet and father, was challenged with two rebellious sons. He used many powerful teaching methods from direct instruction, to life experience. He spoke to them with so much "power, being filled with the Spirit until their frames did shake before him" (1 Nephi 2:14), but one of the most powerful methods he employed was the use of metaphors; begging his sons to be, "like unto [the] valley, firm and steadfast, and immovable" (1 Nephi 2:10). This is not a new or surprising teaching method. 600 years later, Jesus of Nazareth would famously use parables and fables to teach worthwhile life principles; a technique that is mimicked and lauded today.==
 
==Paul Smith appropriately begins his book “Lead with a Story” by telling a story. He recounts how he worked diligently to prepare a presentation for the CEO of Procter & Gamble, A. G. Lafley. At the appointed time and place the CEO entered and, after greeting those already in the room, sat deliberately with his back to the screen, never looking at the slide show. It felt awkward for Smith, who expected his audience to glean significant information from his polished slides. The presentation ultimately went well but more importantly for Smith he took away from that uncomfortable experience that a fact-based power point pitch is often less effective than a well-crafted story.==
 
==I include commentary, such as this, to reinforce concepts I learned by highlighting other people's thoughts on the subject.It is clear that mine are not necessarily original thoughts and, while we discover truths through different mediums and in different orders, I hope what this provides, is reinforcement of these concepts as true and actionable principals.==