**Chapter Six: Individuals make a team: People are your most valuable asset; Counsel, Evaluate, Punish, and Reward**  
I had been on the phone constantly, working to try to put a team together for the deployment. It irritated my wife that I was physically home but mentally absent. I felt I needed to do everything I could to create the best chance for mission success and to do everything I could to bring us all home. Staff Sergeant Brummett fielded the brunt of my obsession with getting the roster right. As Reservists, we met together only once a month, which meant that from our first meeting in November, after I completed the Engineer Officer Basic Course, until April when we left for the National Training Center, we met only one handful of times. Brummett and I scrubbed the potential list a thousand times. "Who’s ==Specialist Johnson,== again?" I asked for tenth time in probably as many days. "I don't think you've met him, Sir." He was patient with me, "I can't get ahold of him." "Is he any good?" I questioned as I likely had before "I don't really know” he thought hard about it for a second then determined. “He can't be that good if he doesn’t show up." "Should we cross him off the list?" I asked hesitantly "We might not have a choice if we can't find him." Brummett shrugged . SPC Johnson had fallen off the face of the earth. He didn't answer phone calls, messages, knocks on his door, smoke signals, nothing. He had disappeared. Then, out of the blue, the day before we left for NTC, I was standing next to Brummett while he loaded some last minute gear, when his phone rang from an unknown number. "Hello?” he questioned “Johnson!?” he questioned more forcefully “Where have you been?… We're going to WAR!… No, Pack your bags… No, we leave tomorrow. Yes, tomorrow. Be at the drill hall at zero five." He hung up without giving Johnson a chance to respond much, if at all, and said matter-of-factly, "That was Johnson with some excuse about how his phone was lost, or stolen, or broken, or some dumb excuse. I told him to be here for formation in the morning" He looked at me and shook his head in disbelief. "Do ya think he'll be here?" I asked. "I have no idea." he said. The next morning there was SPC Johnson, on time, ready to go. There I met him, maybe for the first time. I could have easily seen him before and not paid much attention. Johnson seemed remarkably average, skinny but not lanky, not really tall, but certainly not short, he worn glasses but they weren't remarkable or memorable in any way. In training he was average. He passed tests but did not excel struggling some with the physical fitness test. He "fell out” of training a couple times because of the heat. Not because he wasn't drinking water but just not eating enough. MREs are not a delicacy but the caloric intake is vital.  
This unassuming, unremarkable, kid joined the team of misfits from 2nd Platoon.  
Despite a rocky start Johnson proved to be an invaluable asset. SSG Brummett would later refer to him as a "Break Glass in Case of War" Soldier. At one point Lieutenant Colonel Jurney, Commander of the 1st Battalion 6th Marine Regiment, awarded him a Navy/Marine Corp Achievement Medal after he disarmed five Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) in one night, 19 March 2007, resulting in the finding of a large weapons cache. With the route cleared over 500 newly minted son's of Iraqi and Iraqi Police detained 44 suspected insurgents in what was the fire for the Anbar awakening . The Anbar awakening would ignite an awakening across the country ahead of the surge. SPC Johnson was one Soldier in a team of many teams that made it all possible but his individual contributions is remarkable, and the impact of that one goofy, unremarkable Specialist is immeasurable.  
==Get the right people on the bus (Good to Great)==  
I owe a lot to ==CPT Johnson,== for imparting on me some of his vast tactical wisdom. In many ways I revered him, but he did not like me in the least, nor did he feel that I was ready for the gory reality of combat. CPT Johnson had seen what war was like. He assessed that a naïve, inexperienced lieutenant such as myself had a long way to go not to freeze in the face of death, or crumble at pulling the trigger, or hesitate at ordering others to meet a gruesome fate. He was not wrong. I was naïve, CPT Johnson had won a television while playing poker and directed all of us to use the good fortune to watch a couple of movies that he felt exemplified the hell of war. I respectfully declined. Rooted in my personal values and religious convictions, I had long ago established a personal policy not to watch "R" rated movies. "I'm not asking, I'm ordering" he insisted. He was young, charismatic, capable, and smart. Technically and tactically he was the most proficient in the Battalion, and he knew it. He was also ambitious and arrogant. He seemed determined to be at the helm while our company wiped out the entire insurgent population. He drilled into us an aggressive combat mentality with his motto of "Prey to Kill" the response to which was, "Shoot 'em in the Face". While I understood the inherent brutal nature of our mission, to fight and win, I approached the prospect in a very different way. I grew up on a farm and was familiar with death and even the slaughter and processing of animals. I was not afraid of death, but I did respect it. I read religious text and scripture daily, which are filled with references to conflict, battle, and destruction, but I did not crave it, nor did I delight in the inevitability of shedding blood.  
We held a company leadership meeting each evening at Mob (mobilization) Station. At the end of one meeting CPT Johnson said, as I'm sure he had before, "alright, if there's anything you need, let me know. If there's anything we can do better, let's discuss it." He looked around. Everyone was silent so he opened is mouth as if to adjourn the meeting. I can't really explain why I took that as my queue to air all my grievances but I raised my hand, as if at school. Then, much like a school kid, I didn't wait to be called on to speak. "Sir," I began, "I don't think you going out drinking and gambling is appropriate." The message came out shorter and more blunt than I intended. It was clear but seemed out of nowhere to everyone there. The silence from the shock was thick as depleted uranium armor. I was sure they all had to have thought the same thing at some point but no one had dared to say it. I glanced at my most loyal battle buddy, Lieutenant Peterson, for back up. He shook his head ever so slightly back and forth and looked back with a look that said "this is not the time". I became abruptly aware that I had just called "CHARGE" and began running toward the front of an unconquerable enemy, then looked around and found myself alone, running up the hill with no one following me. I also suddenly realized that this was not the forum, nor was it what the commander meant when he asked to discuss ways we could improve. I also had no concrete evidence of the two allegations with which I had just charged a superior officer but I was already at full tilt and cresting the hill. There was no taking it back now. The awkward silence compelled me to fill the void. I spoke again "While everyone is under general order number one (part of which prohibits consuming alcohol) and up early training hard every day, you stumble in late and sleep in." That did not help my argument and so through the continued shock and deafening silence I made a brief closing argument, "I just don't think it's right, Sir" The commander sat in silence, then finally said "Is that all" in a low tone like a cat biding it's time to pounce. "Yes, Sir" I said. I tried to sound confident but suddenly felt very sheepish. "Anyone else?" He looked around at stunned faces. All shook their heads to the negative. No one spoke "Ok, then this meeting is over, Lieutenant Sparrow, stay here, lets talk." His words were friendly like a an inviting Venus flytrap with an undertone of "wait 'til I get you alone". ”Everyone else is dismissed.“ We stood in unison “Prey to Kill!” We recited together. “Shoot ’em in the Face” Caption Johnson replied with a sneer. "Close the door." he managed through gritted teeth. I did. "Don't you ever speak to me that way" he didn't wait until the door fully closed to start, he had waited long enough. "Yes, Sir" I snapped to attention. This was about to be a one way conversation. "You have no military barring. You are not cut out to be an Army officer and you have no idea what combat is about to be like. Did you even watch those videos I gave you" "No, Sir" I replied "Why the hell not?" He growled. I hesitated to say but ultimately spoke truthfully. "It's against my beliefs to watch rated "R" movies, Sir." "Watch it? You are about to live it! What are you going to do when it's right in front of you?" I did appreciate his intent but I didn't know what else to say. We were both quiet. It wasn't a rhetorical question but I didn't have an answer. He shook his head contemplating "You have an evaluated mission coming up in a coupe days. Do well, and you can keep your job. Perform poorly and I will make sure you never lead a platoon." It was a serious threat. We were both quiet. "Do you have anything to say for yourself?" I was reluctant to say what was on my mind but it came out anyway.  
"I feel like Daniel in the court of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon” I started slowly, my eyes and head down slightly. Then starting to built some courage, I lifted my chin and gaze a little, “when he was commanded to do something contrary to his faith.” I continued building some steam “'Prove me now herewith' he told him." I managed to misquote Daniel with something that sounded more like Malachi, but CPT Johnson had been a preacher at some point in his life and I knew that he understood my reference. There was again an awkward pause as neither of us had anything else to say. "You are dismissed," he said, without any indication as to whether my comment was understood. I attempted a sharp about face but stumbled over myself awkwardly. That had not gone well but I felt great. I had stuck to my values. I also felt sick and panicked that he had probably been right, and I wasn't cut out for this. I did the only thing I knew how to do, I prayed, a lot.  
A strange shuffle of personnel happened over the course of the next couple of days. I don't recall exactly how or why but the battalion staff were required to take part in the same evaluation exercise mentioned by CPT Johnson. Lieutenant Peterson, arguably the best Platoon leader in the battalion at that time, was selected to be a platoon leader for them. Somewhere in that shuffle, there was a change up in Platoon Sergeant leadership as well, and Lieutenant Peterson's strongest Squad leader, Staff Sergeant Stahle, became my Platoon Sergeant and my right hand man for the exercise. For the next three days SFC Stahle carried me metaphorically. His experience, recommendations, directions, and leadership were exceptional. We received the highest marks possible. My career was spared. CPT Johnson avoided me for the next 2 days. When we passed each other in a narrow hallway where confrontation was inevitable he finally said, "You know the only reason you did well on that evaluation is because SSG Stahle made it happen. I knew it. I had a lot of time to think about it. "I know," I said, "isn't it interesting that God works in unexpected ways." He said nothing else and walked away. That may have been the last conversation I ever had with CPT Johnson.  
"Wolf Main, Wolf 2-7, RP, over" My patrol reported our return to base on one of our last training missions. "Good copy Wolf 2-7, break, have Wolf 2-6 report to the CP as soon as he can, Over." It wasn't a strange request, I would be heading there anyway, but by the tone of the request I could tell something was happening. As I walked up to the CP I could see most of the company leadership already gathered. The tension was awkward. First Sergeant finally spoke. ”This is MAJ Trofinoff, from the battalion operations section,” he gestured to a familiar face but we had not interacted. ”Some of you may have met him.” he continued ”CPT Johnson will not be joining us on the deployment. MAJ Trofinoff will be the new Wolf Pack commander.” That was it. No fanfare, little explanation, Johnson's out, Trofinoff's in. I don't know all the details of why and some of what I think I know could be embellished so it sufficed me to say that the Battalion Commander determined some concern serious enough to remove CPT Johnson from command.  
One night, months into the deployment, Lieutenant Peterson stopped me in the dimly lit hallway between our plywood rooms and asked what he appeared to have wanted to ask for a long time. "Did you do anything to ensure CPT Johnson did not to deploy with us?" He was serious. I thought about it. I had desired it, but I hadn't even prayed for it. "No," I replied "but I did pray to be able to endure it and maybe God knew I couldn’t handle it"  
In his book "Good to Great".Jim Collins uses the metaphor of getting the wrong people off the bus to describe the importance of having the right people on the team. ==I want to be clear that CPT Johnson may not be the wrong person for every bus but he was the wrong person for that bus at that time. I want to stress that I would not be the competent leader I am without his tactical instruction. I also want the reiterate that if there is an issue with value's/character, for me, that is non-negotiable. You can mess up a lot of things, as is apparent by the failure after failure I've demonstrated, but for me you don't get a pass on character.==
 
==MAJ Trofinoff== was taking over with less than a week of training left before we deployed. It's hard to express how epic the impact of that type of change can be. Fortunately for B Company, an entire book could be written alone about the lessons of good leadership I learned from him. Two things stand out.  
#1 MAJ Trofinoff exemplified what I later came to understand as servant leadership. A concept that the leader is, in-fact, a servant to those he/she leads. The leader provides clear vision and intent, and ensures subordinates have the resources, including skills and knowledge, they need to accomplish the mission. As part of that, good leaders I've known, also provide a shield from unnecessary drama coming from higher. They create a buffer or "top cover", absorbing the impact of reprimands for faults while side-stepping praise in order to give credit to the team. They act as a filter, distilling out the noise in order to communicate the important elements mandated from higher and requests for recourses from lower. This is a difficult balancing act. Filter to much and critical information is lost; don't filter enough and information is purely data and not actionable intelligence.  
#2 MAJ T. has provided support to the Soldiers who served with him and their families far beyond the timeline of his tenure. He continues to mentor, inspire, and simply reach out to people. He truly cares. This is not a requirement but I guess that's what makes him a remarkable and not simply a good leader.  
==Our memories continue to be formed even after an event and can even be influenced by later experiences. A leader who continues to positively engage periodically after his or her tenure can impact their legacy.==  
==Nathan Young==, by his own diagnosis, is an Alfa male of Alfa males. I watched once as a group of guys debated about where to eat lunch. Someone suggested Taco Bell for its proximity and convenience. The rest of the crowd, of 15 or so, all immediately scoffed him to shame, expressing their disdain for Taco Bell and describing that they would rather eat feces than be subjected to such toxic sludge. They bantered back and forth for probably 10 minutes figuring out where to go; long enough that they could have already ordered food somewhere and long enough that I was about to pick for them. Too expensive, too far, too crowded, too overrated. They finally settled on where to eat when Young walked in. "Where are we eating?" he asked the collective. "Burger King" a few chimed together, proud of their final consciences. The rest nodded in agreement. "Burger King?" Young made a face. "Ok, well, enjoy, I'm going to Taco Bell." With that he turned around and walked back out. They all looked at each other, shrugged, stood up, and they all followed Young to Taco Bell.  
I held the title of Platoon Leader but it was clear to me who was in charge. So many times I put out directions and everyone looked to Young for approval, he nodded and they executed. Young was an E-5 "Buck" Sergeant operating as a Squad leader because of a lack of other Non-Commissioned Officers in the Unit. When we mobilized I was told we could get backfilled if we requested additional E-6's. We received an E-6, Staff Sergeant, for our training at the National Training Center. I'm a little embarrassed to admit I don't remember a lot about him but for many reasons he was not a good fit and was reassigned. In addition to referent power because of his charisma, Young was one of very few in the group who had deployed before. His knowledge of deployment gave him unmatched expert power that he handled professionally.  
The remarkable characteristic of SGT Young was not the power he wielded but the power he willingly gave up for the good of the of the order. George Washington is known for his time as the General of the Revolution, President of the Constitutional Convention, and first President of the United States of America but he is remembered and revered for ceding his post for the good of the Nation. So many times I heard SGT Young say, "L-T's in charge, so we listen to him". As a self-conscious, inexperienced kid from the sticks, I would not be where I am today without the power of SGT Young as the first follower.  
==To be a leader, you must have followers. I have been an effective leader on several occasions, not because of my own skills or influence, but because of the support of an influential first follower==  
But SGT Young’s impact goes far beyond talking others into playing follow the leader.  
We arrived in Kuwait only to a barrage of more training. By 2006, no one wanted the liability of sending a unit into battle without "sufficient" training. By the time we finished, we joked that all the training had been a torturous ploy to make us beg to be done with training so we could finally relax and go fight a war. Training complete, and finally waiting for our flight into Iraq the next day, I met with the company leadership for an update. "There are a couple of late deployers who completed individual training at Fort Bliss and are joining us as augmentees." the first Sergeant announced. "There's a Staff Sergeant with them. Lieutenant Sparrow, you have first pick in the whole battalion since Second Platoon is short a squad leader." "We're not short a squad leader" I retorted. "SGT Young's not an E-6". He replied "SGT Young is a great squad leader." I came back again. "Ok, well, you are short an E-6. So he's yours if you want him." the First Sergeant nearly insisted ."But I don't want him." I was clear. "You should take him," Lieutenant Peterson jumped in with much older and wiser wisdom. "At least think about it." "I don't need to think about it." I fired back "At least go talk to your platoon." he pleaded. "Ok, I'll go talk to the Squad leaders and be right back to let you know we don't need him."  
"Who is it?" SGT Young asked. "I don't know, I never even met him." I said, surprised at the question, I looked at the piece of paper in my hand for the first time. "Staff Sergeant…. Head-le-sten" I pronounced. "Head?" Young inquired a little excited. I just looked at him "Is it James Heddlesten?" he asked. "Uhh.." I looked at the paper again "I don't know" I searched "If it's James Heddlesten, then we want him." SGT Young's immediate response shocked me. "He would take over your squad." I asserted, to be clear what was at stake. I looked at SSG Brummett and SSG Hale to talk sense into him. "It's his squad to give up." Hale responded with indifference. Brummett agreed. I was confused. That was not the way I thought that would go. Months we had trained together. Really, an entire year Brummett, Young, and I spent preparing for this day and here we were, at the starting gate, and some stranger was about to waltz in and take over Young's squad that he trained, and baby sat, and loved. But, like Hale said, it was his squad to give up and we trusted Young. So, I went back to the First Sergeant who confirmed that it was in-fact James, and just like that, Heddlesten joined the team.  
In the book Extreme Ownership, winning at all costs is described as doing whatever it takes to help the team be successful. Young was confident, clearly, but also, importantly, ==humble enough to put his ego in check and do the right thing for the team.== I believe it demonstrates superior confidence to not be threatened by someone who is better than you at some things. The truth is everyone is better than you at something. And bringing Headleston on board was the right choice.
 
SSG Heddlested was fiercely loyal to that team, even to blows, which may be a story for another book. He was even ferociously loyal to ==SPC Porath==, who got along with no one. SPC Porath possessed zero social skills. His attitude was atrocious. Yet SSG Heddlesten, his squad leader, was determined to make him part of the team. He was determined that SPC Porath had some skill to contribute. “He’s fearless”, SSG Heddlesten told us on multiple occasions. “He’s stupid and he doesn’t know any better,” Hale insisted bluntly, with whom no one disagreed. “He will do whatever you ask him to do. If you say, 'Porath, I need you to drive that Meerkat to the bottom of the Euphrates River and scan for IEDs' he will say, 'roger' and go do it. He may complain about it, but he will do it." Then Heddlesten stuck his arms out in front of him as if he held a steering wheel, mimicking SPC Porath driving his Meerkat grumbling senselessly "raza frazza Meerkat, stupid, shafaza," he stutter stepped forward, crouching down hands out in front of him now angled towards the floor as if driving down. His grumbling became gargling as he duck walked around pretending to scan underwater. After a few passes back and forth and a few circles for good measure he slowly stood up straight as he walked, arms angled upward, driving up the other bank of the imaginary river still grumbling. “No IEDs down there, Sir.”  
SPC Porath had gotten the job of driving the Meerkat because it was a one man vehicle. Since no one could stand to be in the same room as him, an isolated capsule seemed like a potential fit. I don’t know how Heddlesten convinced me to allow Porath to continue to drive the Meerkat. Frankly I don’t know how he talked me into letting him drive it in the first place after he had managed to wreck one at the Route Reconnaissance/Clearance Operator Course at Fort Leonard Wood, MO. Once in Ramadi, he spent more time wrecking than he did driving. Porath had driven and wrecked everything our platoon owned and some of the things owned by other platoons. He tipped a vehicle on its side once, burying the vehicle in the mud to such an extent that it covered the hatch and he trapped himself inside. It took hours to dig him out, upright the vehicle, and recover it from the self-dug grave. But somehow SSG Heddlesten continued to convince me, and somehow I continued to convince the commander, MAJ T, that it was ok. One evening while leaving out Ogden Gate of Camp Ramadi, SPC Porath got too far behind and lost track of the vehicle in front of him in the dust. Rather than slow down and let the dust clear, he sped forward to catch up and ran smack into a barrier. The rear truck watched the carnage unfold and called for everyone to halt over the radio. "Meerkat, Wolf 2/3, are you ok?" “I’m bleeding” was his only response he gave over the radio. It was not nearly as dire as it sounded. He bumped his head on the mount that held his night vision goggles which scratched him above his eyebrow. A tiny trickle of blood dripped into his eye. The damage to the vehicle was not overrated, however. The price tag of nearly $100,000 ensured no amount of persuasion from his squad leader would convince anyone to let him drive again. The damage to the platoon’s egos was unbearable, after being defeated by a barrier at the gate, not the enemy. The mission was ultimately cancelled and so were Porath's driving days. It was finally clear that driving was not his strength. Porath spent some time in the motor pool trying to help fix trucks when they came in damaged from missions. He had some knack at fixing things and could have done well at this, but could not get along with any of the mechanics or the rest of the platoon staying back to fix trucks.  
About that time I was frustrated by chronic communication problems. As we shifted in and out of different battle-space owner's territory we had to communicate quickly on various shifting frequencies. We had some platoon members with decent understanding of radios but I wanted someone who could be the platoon radio guru; someone who could focus almost solely on commo (short for communications). Someone that I could know was the guy I would go to, to fix whatever problem I had. When SSG Heddlesten recommended Porath I baulked immediately, thinking of all the things he could break. I explained that I needed someone I could count on and someone that could actually do the job. SSG Hale, who was particularly good at being blunt and honest, said, “Look, we all hate Porath, but he is actually pretty good with commo” everyone else nodded their heads in agreement. “Well,” I thought, “at least he won’t have to drive it”.  
In the lead-up to operation Battle Torch, part of the larger operation Marne Torch, LTC Adgie, "Battle 6", held a combined arms rehearsal. "Alright" he spoke in a low gruff voice. "I think we're ready. I have just one major concern. The COMSEC changes over right at a critical part of the operation. How do we maintain op tempo and ensure we can communicate?" He looked at the signal officer (S6).  
Our radios operated on alternating frequencies. The frequencies "hopped" in sync but the hopping pattern was changed periodically, making it difficult to crack and thus difficult too intercept radio communication. The commander's concern was, that if we had to pause to reestablish communication we could lose momentum and potentially lose the ability to talk to each other all together. Before each mission we verified we could communicate with each other. In this case, someone could lose coms and be a hazard on the battlefield instead of an asset.  
The S6 danced around the question without an amenable solution. A couple of leaders from other units chimed in, more with concerns than viable solutions. I raised my hand. "What'd you got Wolf" LTC Adgie asked curiously but a little annoyed. "Once we get the new COMSEC key I have a SPC who loads it onto a separate channel on the radio. At the designated time we just change the channel on the radio and we're on the new COMSEC" They all looked at me as if there were no way it was that easy. "Dog on it CPT" he looked at the S6 "Why is it that some Specialist with the engineers from the National Guard can figure this out when all my smartest como people can't make it happen. You should get your money back from that computer science degree.” He looked over at me but continued to talk to his S6, ”Have your guys get with the route clearance team and make it happen." He made intentional eye contact with me and said, "You're a great American Wolf!" His eyes said, ”here’s a chance to show what you can do.”  
SPC Porath implemented a communication plan though all the units. At the designated time everyone changed the Chanel and held their breath. It worked. No loss of communication. The operation was a huge success. Porath had finally found his knitch; something where he could work independently and where he could be an asset to the team.  
As mentioned previously, Jim Collins in “Good to Great” advocated getting the right people on the bus and the wrong people off. This is a case of getting the right people in the right seats. Gallup shares a similar sentiment in ”Strength Finders“ and "Now Discover Your Strengths." It is critical as a leader to ==maximize strengths and manage weaknesses.==
 
==Oh Hale!==  
From my estimation we sat at maybe the most dangerous intersections in the city of Ramadi, the intersection of Route Spartan and Route Goat; maybe only surpassed in IED threat by the crossing just one block to the North at the intersection of Goat and Muje. The tankers dubbed the east to west running Route Spartan ”the bowling alley”. Varying from 50-100 meters wide, it looked more like a dirt strip of trash and spars weeds, than a road. On one end stood a, once bustling, train station but now a station only for weapons and munitions of the insurgents. On the other end nearly a mile away the tanks could over-watch and fire their 120mm smooth boar into unsuspecting destruction. Intersecting Route Spartan running to the north, Route Goat held a reputation for so many IEDs that even after the route clearance team cleared the road, the infantry and armor units avoided it at all cost, certain that there were always more IEDs buried out of sight.  
The lead vehicle inched slowly forward and I felt uneasy.  
"1, 6" I called on the radio. The lack of response didn't help my anxiety. "2-1, 2-6, over" I called again, "Wolf 2-1, this is Wolf 2-6, over." I called like a mother calling her child by their full first, middle, and last name that lets them know she means business. "What?" ==SSG Hale== finally came back, not at all within radio protocol and crossing the threshold of disrespectful. "1-6" I called back calm but anxious "How about you let the buffalo come up there and dig on that spot." No response. "1-6, did you copy my last, over." "Look 6, we're kinda busy up here so if you can hang tight for one minute that would be great." That hadn’t help calm me. Now I was anxious and upset. I waited a few minutes and watched the lead truck inch forward again. I did not feel good about it "1,6, I'd feel a lot better if you let the buffalo come up there and dig, over" "And I'd feel a lot better if you left me alone and let me do my job, over" He no longer flirted with insubordination, he stepped all over it. The situation tense already from an almost inevitable attack, was now at a boiling point with my squad leader, who appeared to be rogue, inching toward what I felt was certain doom. I picked up the mic to key the radio again when SSG Hale beat me to it. He keyed his mike. "Sir, if you don't trust me to do my job, then fire me. Otherwise let me do my job, Over" That was exactly what was about to happen. Finally, Hale had given me the definitive reason I needed to fire him. I was a wreck with emotions. Despite the daily danger, I didn't typically get very nervous about clearing IEDs. We left the wire and faced the possibility of injury every day, every day, every day. People asked me later how I dealt with that prospect so frequently. My response I find similar to the Incredible Hulk who's secret to staying calm is that he's always angry. I dealt with the prospect of dying by considering myself to already be dead. It helped me to focus on what I could do and not what I couldn’t control. But with the hair standing up on the back of my neck and the churning intensifying in my gut with every inch the lead truck nosed farther North on Route Goat I couldn't ignore the desire to do something.  
"If you don't trust me to do my job, then fire me." I mulled that over in my head. "I **will** fire you." I thought. Did I trust him? I questioned myself. How was I perceived by the rest of the platoon right now? I wondered. I must seem weak and not in control. My subordinate had been insubordinate and I should quash that right now, right? If I don't, what message am I sending? I don't know if I can trust him. What can I trust. I did trust SPC Orton the spotter and gunner but was he persuasive enough to direct a good outcome. I also explicitly trusted SPC Brown, the driver, and he held his foot on the accelerator and the break peddle. I did trust that team. And for that, I risked the back lash it might cause and kept my mouth shut.  
After what seemed like an eternity, Hale finally called again on the radio as the lead truck moved back out of the way. "Ok, 6, send the buffalo up to dig right there." A green laser beamed from his window and drew a line in the dirt. The Buffalo moved forward the robotic arm extended and poked around a bit. "6,1, we spent a good amount of time up there analyzing and we concur that the best chance of finding an IED is to dig right there, over." Again the green laser drew a line in the road. The arm operator maneuvered and dug a few inches to the right then a few inches to the left, the as the green laser danced emphatically over the exact spot the team wanted searched. A pass directly along the line of the laser revealed the prize, several projectiles bundled together and configured to destroy an armored vehicle and kill its occupants. The remainder of the missions was no less exciting with the lead team finding a total of 7 IEDs and 1 Unexploded Ordnance (UXO) (basically an IED that had not yet been wired as a booby trap) before an IED went off on the Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) tech, peppering him with shrapnel in his back side ending further interrogation. It was a lot to digest, not the least of which involved the looming conversation to be had about the way SSG Hale addressed the platoon leader at a tense moment.  
I did trust him and his team but the trust had to be mutual, he had to trust me as well. We worked out our procedures over the next few days and he kept his job.  
==Trust==  
==I had a platoon of misfits. SSG Hale used to say that he trusted them with my life but wouldn’t trust them to wash his car. He was serious about both.==  
==One other note. Don't let your ego get in the way of having people on your team that challenge you. Surrounding yourself with ”yes” men doesn’t lead to solutions to problems you haven't thought of. Respect is key and someone who doesn’t always agree, is not the same as someone who is disagreeable.==
 
==For more stories about the incredible individuals that made up the team of Misfits from 2nd Platoon, B Company read the forthcoming book, "Worth the Risk".==