**Chapter Twelve: Don’t Forget to Enjoy It and Leave a Legacy**  
I served as a route clearance platoon leader in Ramadi, Iraq from 2006-2007. I couldn’t wear a memorial bracelets for all the people I cared about who we lost because my arm and my heart wouldn’t take it. We got hit by so many IEDs I lost count. But, I will never forget when we drove into downtown Ramadi after we had finally ==cleared the last== of the insurgency out of the city. As the lead vehicle rounded a corner out of my sight and faced up the street designated to be cleared, the vehicle commander radioed back to me in confusion and concern. “6,1, they’ve got a volleyball net blocking the road up here." He paused, then asked "What should we do?” He was as serious as I had ever heard him. It was a hilarious question from a guy who fought to be aggressive and not be risk averse, who insisted we put gunners out in the turrets where they could engage the enemy, who had been on the ground and in culverts to find IEDs, who would rush though a hail storm of gunfire to the aid of his comrades The same SSG Hale who said "let me do my job and find IEDs" and "If you don't trust me fire me." It highlights the absurdity of the situation, but mostly, it highlights the depth of our engagement with the enemy, previously any road block or intentional delay had been a set up for an ambush, on this day there would be no ambush, it was people genuinely enjoying themselves. It highlights for me the drastic change we helped propagate and the privileges that was ours to witness victory.  
I called back “1, can you ask them to please move it, over.” “They’re moving it 6, we’ll be moving in a minute.” A few minutes later he came back over the radio. “6, we’re not gonna’ to find any IEDs. There are people everywhere.” I had heard that Ramadi was a city of 200,000 people but I hadn’t seen very many of them. Those that I did see were usually eliminated as a threat. Now droves of people were everywhere, smiling and waving and we were right in the middle of a big parade. In that moment some of the sacrifice seemed validated, at least in some small way for me.
 
As a new father, I thought that I just had to figure out the trick to parenting. I imagined that once I knew the secret I could just put that on repeat until they turned 18 and moved out and I would be good to go. I mean, humans have been parenting children for thousands of years. Surely somebody figured it out by now, I just had to find the magic “three step process”. Unfortunately that’s not a thing. Whenever there are humans involved there are variables and the goal posts keep moving.  
Industries change, rewards change, what motivates people changes, over time the world changes. If you’re not learning and adapting with it, you are not leading. Leaders have to anticipate and it is impossible to anticipate without continuing to study work at it and learn  
A doctor who leaves medical school thinking they know everything there is to know about medicine is sadly mistaken. That doctor can’t even know all that is currently known about medicine, Let alone everything that will be discovered about medicine in the future. that person may be able to practice for a time but will eventually fall behind and fail in their profession.  
Same for leaders, keep learning and keep working at it. Effort is recognized.  
There are things I’ve learned in life that took me a lifetime to understand. What I didn’t know I was learning in preschool was to enjoy life. The learning and working hard comes easier when we are enjoying ourselves. If it’s drudgery then you are not understanding the purpose of the task or you are not finding that spoon full of sugar. There are countless books on positive attitude. It seems the world is all on Prozac, some people need to get it. Others just need to get off their behinds and enjoy life. If you are in a profession you do not enjoy, maybe you should look for the exit. Money means a lot, but it is not everything. Career is a lot, but failing at home is a hefty price to pay for a successful career and leaves some wealthy and empty. Balance life. As a leader it is important that your employees are able to balance their lives too. Don’t forget the individuals that make up your teams, if they are not happy they are harder to lead.  
==“The longer I live, the more I realize the impact of attitude on life. Attitude, to me, is more important than facts. It is more important than the past, than education, than money, than circumstances, than failures, than successes, than what other people think or say or do. It is more important than appearance, giftedness or skill. It will make or break a company...a church....a home. The remarkable thing is, we have a choice every day regarding the attitude we will embrace for that day. We cannot change our past...we cannot change the fact that people will act in a certain way. We cannot change the inevitable. The only thing we can do is play on the one string we have, and that is our attitude...I am convinced that life is 10% what happens to me and 90% how I react to it. And so it is with you...we are in charge of our attitudes.”==  
==― Charles R. Swindoll==  
==It is my grand hope that whomever reads these words will recognize that I have done little right, to the contrary, maybe the only thing I have done right is having a growth mindset and continuing to learn and preserver. I aspire to be a great leader, in truth I'm barley a mediocre father and probably just squeak past lousy to be an average husband. Even my own lessons, I forget. I fail, and return like a dog to it's vomit again and again. I see others who are stronger, smarter, and much more capable than I, but I warn that, envy, pride, self loathing, and bitterness are enemies to happiness. In contrast, gratitude, humility, acknowledgement, and learning are seeds to fulfillment and joy.==  
==Before I close, one point I want to make: Getting to where I am took hard work and sacrifice. Sometimes at the expense of the family I love more than any awards or recognition or accomplishments I have made. Don’t forget the sacrifices your people make. Sacrifice to be a leader. I also make this last point so as not to bury it deep inside some forgettable monolog or story. Please never forget that there are people behind the people who work for you. They are all different, but don’t forget the families.==  
I am amazed everyday by how much difference leadership, or lack of leadership, makes in organizations and in the lives of people. Leadership Matters!  
==So we end where we began. Learn who you are. Learn your history. Use your talents and experiences to leave a legacy. Be the leader you want to see.==  
==The book has to end at some point. And here is as good a place as any. Life will keep going and when I die others will follow and carry on the story. I believe that in some other state we to will carry on to new experiences and more learning.==  
==“If you want a happy ending, that depends, of course, on where you stop your story.”====￼== ==-====Orson Welles==