**PHASE 5: THE OFFICER (Training for War)**  
**Week 19 - May 27: The Tree Across the Road**  
_Theme: Command Presence vs. Confusion_  
[Chapter Five: Leaders Make It Happen]  
My first Battle Assembly with C Company I was not as prepared to be a leader as they were prepared to make me a leader. A Soldier led the way for me through a big field next to the Reserve Center to a large dirt berm. On the other side of the berm I was surprised to see so many Soldiers preparing for a mock mission. "Here’s your platoon" he directed. 25 or so guys stood in a circle all looking at me. They acted as if they hung on my every word as I stammered through an on-the-fly plan. They showed confidence in me that I was unworthy of, and I felt it. We loaded into vehicles and began our mock patrol down a dirt road through the open field. I rode in a HMMWV with two 113 armored personnel carriers (APC) in front of me filled with combat engineers. Suddenly, as we passed a lone tree, a loud boom shattered the calm, routine feeling I had. A powder landmine exploded under the lead vehicle, followed immediately by the "pop, pop, pop" of gunfire as ambushers fired blank ammunition from the tall grass on the side of the road. I had not realized that we would run into any opposing forces (OPROR). I had thought we were just going to take a short drive around the site, practice convoy and radios procedures, and be done. Now we were under attack. I was overwhelmed. “What do you want us to do?” They asked me. I was the leader. But I panicked. I ordered the other two vehicles to go around the “disabled” vehicle. We sped around and out of the “kill zone”. I left them there, not knowing the extent of their "injuries". The scenario got worse for me as opposing force captured one of our Soldiers. They produced a rough note of propaganda demanding ransom, prompting a raid and the subsequent liberation of the incarcerated Soldier; not to be completed without a full fanfare return celebration. They laughed and high-fived. It was an insignificant training exercise. The rest of the guys were good sports about it. I am likely the only person there that still remembers it. But I didn’t celebrate. I was sick. That exercise impacted me so profoundly that it became one of the driving forces for writing this book. I had buckled under pressure. I had left a fallen comrades on the field of battle. I had failed. I still feel sick to think about it. I swore that I would never do such a thing again.  
You don’t always get it right the first time. Practice everything you can before you do it for real… as always, learn.  
A second note, I’ve written some already about how critical it is for a leader to have the trust of those who follow. Trust can be increased in many ways, one of which is demonstrated competence, which can be build through multiple iterations with continued improvement.  
“What are we doing?” the team leader asked annoyed and impatient. “What does it look like we are doing? We’re standing here in the middle of the woods waiting to get dead, because no one knows what we're doing". I thought. Fortunately, this was a training exercise, so the threat of actual loss of life was not eminent. The scenario was made up but the frustration was real, and mounting quickly.  
It was fall of 2005, in the woods of Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. To qualify to be Engineer Officers we took turns serving as the leader of the platoon, and in various other leadership capacities, as part of a final field exercise/evaluation. In this particular scenario, the platoon leader, one of my peers in charge of 30 or so of us for that mission, gave a rushed brief, which I didn’t truly understand. Before I had any real sense of our task, we were loaded into big, open back, Army trucks, and shuttled down a dirt road. Fortunately, I found myself in the same truck as the platoon leader and I began a barrage of questions from which I got vague responses that didn’t answer basic concerns, like "where are we going?" and "what are we doing?" The truck stopped and we piled out. Well, slowly climbed out. Everyone seemed overly concerned about securing the ladder to the truck before we dismounted, despite the supposed tactical scenario. I followed suit with everyone else as we gaggled away from the trucks into the woods in what I determined to be a North-ish direction along the dirt road. I was unsettled. Despite being a squad leader, in charge of about 10 other lieutenants for this mission, I still had no concept of the plan or what my part in it would be.  
We halted and the platoon leader, gesturing vaguely into the woods ahead of us, said, "Your squad will cordon the South side. I will go ahead with the search team". I nodded that I understood. The rest of the platoon stumbled on a Northeast trajectory into the woods as I continued directly North with my squad until reaching a rise in the ground that provided some cover and, from which, I could see a small group of buildings in a horseshoe pattern surrounded by the dense Mark Twain National Forest on all sides. The dirt road we came in on continued North, passing by the West side of the “village”. I indicated to my squad that we would halt here. The remainder of the platoon gaggled for a while, then moved toward the buildings. I stared at the backs of their heads as they “maneuvered” into the woods closer to the village. My frozen stupor was interrupted by one of the Lieutenants acting as my team leader for the mission as he asked, “What are we doing?” I was as annoyed, confused, and impatient as he. But despite what I wanted to say, “What does it look like we are doing? We’re standing here in the middle of the woods waiting to get dead, because no one knows what we're doing". What came out of my mouth was something that surprised even me, “We are the southern cordon for this cordon and search mission.”  
“Where do you want my team?” he asked, seeming to have gotten the clarity and confidence he needed from my short, matter of fact, statement. I thought, “Who cares, just stand wherever you want, take a nap, eat a snack, it doesn’t matter, this is a stupid mission with no plan anyway.” What I said instead was, “Take the right side of my position and have the other team take the left side.” Not a complicated or inspiring plan, but direction just the same, which he executed swiftly without any argument or delay.  
A few minutes later my other team leader approached me, again braking my stare into the village where the platoon leader was "sneaking" up to people who could clearly see that he was there. The normally thick woods were bare of leaves in the crisp late fall air. A few months prior the brush would have concealed a company a few meters in front of them. Now, one could observe from hundreds of meters away. The fact that I could see into the village meant that they probably could see my position. But this Platoon leader, I guess, thought he was being sneaky.  
“Do you want us to block off the road?” the team leader questioned. Again my thoughts were less than helpful. “What we do out here isn’t going to make a bit of difference. Are you even watching this? We’re all going to die anyway.” instead, I again managed to make a confident decision and directed boldly. “We are the Southern cordon for this cordon and search mission. Can you cordon off that side without blocking the road?” I asked almost rhetorically. “No” he replied a little sheepish. “Then block it off.” I said bluntly but not to aggressively. I focused my attention back onto the group of Lieutenants nearest the people in the village. I was too far away to hear them but they seemed to be attempting to communicate with the ”locals”. I watched for some time before my focus was again broken; this time by a voice of someone with authority. I turned quickly to pay attention. “Lieutenant Sparrow, what the hell are you doing.” CPT V addressed me sharply. Here was my chance to express my complete disgust for this entire mission. I thought that I was going to say, “Sir, I don’t know what I’m doing. This mission was broken before it got started.” What I said surprised me again. “My squad is cordoning off the South side of this village, Sir”  
“What are you doing on the road?” He clarified, getting to the heart of his question. “Sir, we cannot cordon off the area if we are letting traffic in and out”. I said confidently. “Lieutenant, there is civilian traffic trying to get through and you have half a tree across the road.” At that, I looked toward the road, probably for the first time. CPT V had understated by describing it as "half a tree". It looked more like a whole tree to me. I don’t know where they got it or, more impressively, how they moved it there, but there it was, a huge dead tree across the entire width of the road and cars were piling up on either side. “Sir, we’re here to do the mission we were given to the best of our ability…”I began my defense. CPT V stopped me, took a breath, and looked seriously at me. “I get what your trying to do Lieutenant…I get it. You can’t block off the road." I took a breath to plead my case again. "It’s not in play.” he said over his shoulder as he began to walk away. The look on his face told me this was the end of our conversation. I told the team leader to move the tree, "We can't bock off the road" I instructed. He could see that I had just been defeated so didn’t bother to ask any questions. It didn’t matter anyway. Moments later the sound of gun fire came from the buildings. What followed was, as I predicted, a massacre of our platoon at the hands of a couple of guys running circles around us in the woods and though the buildings. The slaughter may well have included my squad as well, although we were holding our own when the call of "ENDEX" (end exercise) saved us definitively before we found out. That didn't matter to me. Nor is it the point of the story. I was deep in contemplation about what had transpired. In the lack of real guidance and despite my own lack of confidence in the mission, I had managed to instill confidence in those I led. I had managed to do the right thing and execute a successful mission for my squad. It was at that moment that I realized the power of a leader. If I had said what I was thinking, those thoughts in that moment would not have been helpful. Dwelling on the problem creates nothing but more problems. Dwelling on a solution and executing to the best of our ability resulted in mission accomplishment, at least for that short period of time. – Leaders Make it Happen