**PHASE 6: THE TEAM (The Misfits)**  
**Week 24 - Jul 01: The Break-Glass Soldier**  
_Theme: SPC Johnson: Undervalued Assets (Moneyball)_  
[Chapter Six: Individuals make a team]  
I had been on the phone constantly, working to try to put a team together for the deployment. It irritated my wife that I was physically home but mentally absent. I felt I needed to do everything I could to create the best chance for mission success and to do everything I could to bring us all home. Staff Sergeant Brummett fielded the brunt of my obsession with getting the roster right. As Reservists, we met together only once a month, which meant that from our first meeting in November, after I completed the Engineer Officer Basic Course, until April when we left for the National Training Center, we met only one handful of times. Brummett and I scrubbed the potential list a thousand times. "Who’s Specialist Johnson, again?" I asked for tenth time in probably as many days. "I don't think you've met him, Sir." He was patient with me, "I can't get ahold of him." "Is he any good?" I questioned as I likely had before "I don't really know” he thought hard about it for a second then determined. “He can't be that good if he doesn’t show up." "Should we cross him off the list?" I asked hesitantly "We might not have a choice if we can't find him." Brummett shrugged . SPC Johnson had fallen off the face of the earth. He didn't answer phone calls, messages, knocks on his door, smoke signals, nothing. He had disappeared. Then, out of the blue, the day before we left for NTC, I was standing next to Brummett while he loaded some last minute gear, when his phone rang from an unknown number. "Hello?” he questioned “Johnson!?” he questioned more forcefully “Where have you been?… We're going to WAR!… No, Pack your bags… No, we leave tomorrow. Yes, tomorrow. Be at the drill hall at zero five." He hung up without giving Johnson a chance to respond much, if at all, and said matter-of-factly, "That was Johnson with some excuse about how his phone was lost, or stolen, or broken, or some dumb excuse. I told him to be here for formation in the morning" He looked at me and shook his head in disbelief. "Do ya think he'll be here?" I asked. "I have no idea." he said. The next morning there was SPC Johnson, on time, ready to go. There I met him, maybe for the first time. I could have easily seen him before and not paid much attention. Johnson seemed remarkably average, skinny but not lanky, not really tall, but certainly not short, he worn glasses but they weren't remarkable or memorable in any way. In training he was average. He passed tests but did not excel struggling some with the physical fitness test. He "fell out” of training a couple times because of the heat. Not because he wasn't drinking water but just not eating enough. MREs are not a delicacy but the caloric intake is vital.  
This unassuming, unremarkable, kid joined the team of misfits from 2nd Platoon.  
Despite a rocky start Johnson proved to be an invaluable asset. SSG Brummett would later refer to him as a "Break Glass in Case of War" Soldier. At one point Lieutenant Colonel Jurney, Commander of the 1st Battalion 6th Marine Regiment, awarded him a Navy/Marine Corp Achievement Medal after he disarmed five Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) in one night, 19 March 2007, resulting in the finding of a large weapons cache. With the route cleared over 500 newly minted son's of Iraqi and Iraqi Police detained 44 suspected insurgents in what was the fire for the Anbar awakening . The Anbar awakening would ignite an awakening across the country ahead of the surge. SPC Johnson was one Soldier in a team of many teams that made it all possible but his individual contributions is remarkable, and the impact of that one goofy, unremarkable Specialist is immeasurable.  
Get the right people on the bus (Good to Great)