**Week 22 - Jun 17: The Moral Compass**  
_Theme: Maintaining innocence in war (Moral Injury)_  
[Chapter Five: Part 4]  
Between the rotation to the National Training Center and mobilization station I spent six weeks at the Explosive Ordinance Clearing Agent Course, which I will forever claim makes me an agent. The first three weeks of the course were academically rigorous and several Soldiers failed out. By studying together with the cohort from my unit, we all made it through together. Once we maneuvered past the initial gauntlet, the second half of the course was a blast, if you will excuse my pun. We spent the next three weeks at the demolition range operating robots and blowing stuff up. It was a grand time and we were mentally and physically more ready than we had ever been to do our job overseas. Emotionally, however, I was growing somewhat restless. I remained in contact with the company commander and the preparations continuing with the rest of the unit in my absence. The commander maintained a hyper aggressive attitude, revealing his wolf Pack motto "Prey to Kill!". While I fundamentally understood that the military is in the business of killing people and I understood that literal survival for myself and for my team meant confronting and engaging the enemy, I was uneasy about taking a deliberate gory, slasher, scorched earth approach. I had called my dad on a number of occasions. As is obvious by now, he mentored me abundantly throughout my life and continues to be a great mentor, but by his own admission, this was uncharted territory for him. "How do I maintain innocence at war?" I asked directly "I don't know the answer to that, son." he conceded. "But you know who you could call? Rich Stewart." Six houses down on the left a little more than a mile West from where I grew up in the house at the bend in the road, the flag of the United States of America flew straight out most days in the southern Idaho wind at the unassuming home of Lieutenant Colonel Retired Rich Steward. A helicopter pilot and instructor, LTC Stewert had been recalled to active duty for his skill at training pilots.  
I called him. "Sir, this is Lieutenant Scott Sparrow, Marv Sparrow's boy. How are you, Sir?" "Lieutenant Scott Sparrow, your dad told me you might call. I'm well. How are you?"  
We exchanged a few more pleasantries then I got right to the point. LTC(Ret) Stewart was direct but kind, candid and thoughtful. His comments and our conversation changed nothing more than my resolve to do what I already knew I had to do to execute the mission, but now with hope that I could remain human. For me, at that time, that was huge.  
The leader is the moral compass. Every Soldier, Sailor, Marine, Airman, has some autonomy to make ethical decisions. Each, when faced with the reality of combat, must make the decision to pull the trigger or not. But the leader got them to that battlefield and informed them what the enemy looked like. To heighten the stakes, the enemy is trying to kill before being killed. The bottom line, even if he/she is wrong about everything else, the leader has to be right about what is right.  
A more obvious lesson here is about the power of a mentor. Find a mentor, encourage others to find mentors, encourage others to be mentors, you be a mentor. Good mentors are those with similar experiences and/or interests, who have made it to where you want to be. It is not always great to follow money advise from broke people, unless they are telling you what not to do. It seems there are an over abundance of people who want to give advise who don’t have first hand experience and thus probably have no idea what they are talking about. The best mentors are also good listeners, capable of recognizing that the path they took is not the only possible route and not necessarily the best route for others to follow.