**Chapter Seven: Risk assessment and risk reduction: not risk aversion.**  
Despite all the years of training, months of planning, and weeks of traveling, one can never be fully prepared for the experience of combat. Even for those who have deployed and experienced similar environments before, there is no better lesson than being “on the ground”, and there are no better instructors than the people who carried out the mission for the past year. This changing of the guards is known as a relief in place (RIP). A critical element to the RIP is a right seat/left seat ride. In American automobiles, the steering wheel is on the left side, and so it follows that the individual driving the vehicle sits on the left side and the passenger on the right. Experience has shown that it is beneficial for incoming leaders to sit in the, preverbal, right seat while observing the outgoing leader as they “drive” the mission. Then, at a designated time, the roles are reversed and the incoming leaders and Soldiers take the helm while continuing to receive council, mentorship, and training from the subject matter experts (SME).  
13 October 2006 marked my first day in the left seat as a Platoon leader on a combat patrol. After the final brief, I had a picture taken of myself, platoon Sergeant, three squad leaders and a hand-full of others. We loaded the vehicles and made our way towards Ogden Gate of Camp Ramadi. Outside the gate, the patrol made an immediate left onto Route Michigan. As the final vehicle radioed that they had exited the gate and that all vehicles were tracking on Route Michigan, the lead gun truck called up that they were on the bridge. The bridge crossed the head of a large canal spurring from the Euphrates River. As we reached the opposite bank we entered check point 294, marked by a large round-about in front of the Marine’s Base, Hurricane Point, a small triangle peninsula, wedged between the Euphrates River and the large cannel which supplied life down-stream. At check point 294 SSG Bratcher exited the base and climbed into our vehicle. I held the door and provided security for him on the back deck of the Buffalo. Once aboard we were moving again, turning southeast toward the heart of the city. As we passed Observation Point (OP) VA and reached check point 295, a major intersection, I noticed a large bag in the center of the right lane, just before the intersection. From the bag extended a thick cable leading off the roadway to the right. I was not the only one to have noticed. It was like a page out of a training lane. “This is too obvious” I thought, but indicated for the driver to approach and for the robotic arm operator to interrogate. After disconnecting the cable, the arm operator emptied the contents of the bag. Two 125mm projectiles flopped out onto the asphalt. “Surely route clearance was not this easy.” I thought. The contents secured, and with spirits soaring, we continued mission (CM). Prior to reaching the next intersection and checkpoint (296) the lead vehicle announced a speed bump in the center of the road with a wire disappearing into an ally to the North. A “speed bump”, I then learned, was a metal box with a low profile, tapered at the ends and filled with home made explosives (HME). This one appeared to be about 12” wide by 12” long and about 1 - 2” thick. It looked more like a giant ravioli square to me, but speed bump would work. The driver approached the device slowly and the arm operator extended the robotic arm to interrogate. Just as the arm reached the devise it exploded sending bits of shrapnel into the side of the vehicle. I burst out, “PAH!” The 23 ton vehicle didn’t even budge a millimeter. It not so much as popped a tire. That was it. My first engagement by the enemy. “This is awesome!” I declared. Suddenly a rocket wizzed past the front of the vehicle and slammed into the barrier on the opposite side of the road. This explosion was no laughing matter. The driver stomped the accelerator to the floor just as a second rocket screeched out of the alleyway from the North and just past the rear bumper of the vehicle. The concussion shook the truck and shook me to the depth of my gut. We narrowly escaped the ambush. It appeared the obvious first IED had been a delay tactic to set up the actual ambush farther up the road. The speed bump had worked exactly as designed, to slow us down and stop us in the kill zone. Those 57 mm rockets would have torn right through us had the trajectory been more accurate. We were lucky to be alive.  
At check point 296 the entire patrol doubled back, cautiously approaching the gauntlet we had just traversed. Then proceeded North on route Ice cream, so named for the Ice cream sign on the corner store. Although I never got any ice cream there. We crept slowly up the street. If I were to describe it as a snail’s pace, it would be like comparing a turtle to the speed of sound; we were moving like pond water. Then the lead truck called up that they had a cut out; another new term for me. Insurgents skillfully used a concrete saw to cut into the roadway and remove the asphalt, then dug a hole with a shovel or post hole digger precisely the size of the ordnance or other explosive material. They then returned the "cap" as if nothing were there. They did this with such meticulous precision that it was extremely difficult to detect or disarm. But it had rained earlier that day and while it had mostly dried up our timing was such that the water which seeped into the cracks had not dried as quickly as the rest of the roadway, highlighting the cuts in the asphalt. It was like a beacon declaring “IED buried here”. We found and disarmed two additional cut outs that night before returning to base, but not before the last vehicle was attacked with a couple of grenades. It had been an eventful night to say the least. We had made it unscathed and we continued to become more proficient at or craft. But, 5 nights later, without the helpful mentorship of the departed unit we replaced, the near fatal events would test us almost to breaking.
 
Should gunners in the vehicles be up or down? If a gunner is up, in the turret, he runs the risk of being shot or hit by fragmentation from an explosive blast, rocket, or rocket propelled grenade. If a gunner is down, inside the vehicle, he may miss the opportunity to engage the triggerman or deter an attack from happening all together.  
If a vehicle is struck by an IED, should the other members of the patrol rush to their aid, at the risk of exposure to a secondary explosion and the initiation of the actual ambush? or should the patrol cautiously search for secondary devices, at the risk of not aiding a fallen and potentially dyeing comrade?  
As we trained for combat these and other questions came up again and again, and were hotly debated. These questions were fundamental to how we would operate in theater. But the argument was so contentious that I, as the platoon leader, avoided making a decision and deferred that we would "wait and see" how the unit we replaced operated, then adopt a similar strategy.  
Upon arrival to Ramadi, the issues, and the contention with them, had not been resolved. The unit we replaced operated with the gunners down inside the vehicles; which did not satisfy those who felt that we had come so far away from our families to a combat zone to make a difference, not to simply survive. They wanted to eliminate the IEDs by eliminating those who buried the devices in the road, not simply remove IEDs night after night at the risk of not finding them or getting hit by the explosives.  
SSG Hale, the squad leader for first squad, spent several years in the Marines before shifting to the Army Reserve, joining the handful of combat veterans in our platoon. He was one of the most vocal proponents of an aggressive posture. His perspective differed drastically from SFC Hartman, our Platoon Sergeant, who adopted a more cautious approach.  
18 October, just after sunset, we left Ogden Gate, turned left, crossed the cannel, picked up SSG Bratcher, turned Southeast, and moved toward OP VA, as we were now accustomed. Suddenly a flash of light and massive explosion ripped through the young night. We were still within the range fan of Hurricane Point and caught completely off guard by the attack. The lead RG31, mine resistant vehicle, once a beacon of search lights, went instantly dark, the radio fell silent. "Wolf 2-1, Wolf 2-6, are you ok, over." I called panicked. Everyone froze, holding their breath. The silence was deafening, and highlighted the ringing in our ears from the concussive blast. Nothing happened for what seemed like minutes. Then the rear truck burst passed us and pulled beside the smoking darkened vehicle. SGT Krier spoke to the occupants from the turret. "6,3 they're shaken up but they're all ok." I finally breathed. A rocket propelled grenade fired from an ally struck the truck just in front of the driver. It must have skipped off the adjacent barrier, miss-shaping the cone, rendering the explosively formed projectile inoperable, and keeping it from penetrating deep into the crew cab killing all inside. The concussion of the explosion was no less violent, frying the alternator and knocking out all electronics.  
From behind me, I could hear the Marine wrecker crew from Hurricane Point spinning up. (I pause briefly to thank those brave Marines, whom I never formally met, for their courage and skill.) We later dubbed them MAD MAX for their speed at arriving on scene, calmness in any chaotic environment, and ability to hook up and recover any mess of twisted, blown up metal that once resembled a vehicle. MAD MAX arrived within minutes and in less time they had the vehicle hooked up and on its way back to Camp Ramadi. The Marines determined to postpone the mission and we all returned to base. We pulled back into the parking spots we left less than an hour before and exited our vehicles. Tension loomed thick in the air. We stood in a circle to conduct an after action review as we did after every mission. Bitterness in the team after what had just transpired meant not everyone felt they wanted to be a part of the circle and stood a few steps back. I always allowed the lowest ranking individual to speak first. "Privet McKeen, What do you want to say" I asked glancing at SSG Hale who looked like he wanted to rip my throat out. Privet McKeen had driven the rear vehicle; the only one to rush up to the aid of those in the damaged truck. "Honestly, Sir," he hesitated. "Yes, say what you wanna' say," I encouraged. "Sir," he paused again, then went for it. "Sir, that was F***ed up!" I looked at him to show I was listening and nodded that he should continue. "Brown just took a rocket to the face and everyone just sat there. You just sat there, Sir. You did nothing! You are the leader, and you directed nothing. Thank God everyone is ok, but they might not have been." It stung, but he was right; I froze. Except for the actions of PVT McKeen and his truck, we all froze at a critical moment and it was my fault. I had hesitated to make critical decisions about how we would deal with risk and the result was, that despite nearly a year of training, when it came right down to it, we didn't react. "Anyone else?" I managed to ask. SSG Hale could bite his tongue no longer. "What the hell was that? You left us out there! You better damn well believe that if that was one of you, I would have risked my life to get up to you. At least some of you I can trust" He looked at SSG Heddlesten who commanded the rescuing truck, then back at me and SFC Hartman. "Our leaders are going to get us all killed." "Hold on Sergeant Hale" SFC Hartman tried to jump in to defend himself and me. The ensuing argument almost came to blows between SFC Hartman and SSG Hale several times as they both expressed compelling reasons for rushing in to aid a downed team member versus the risk of being another victim for others to rescue.  
As my platoon erupted into chaos, miss trust, and resentment, my mind went back to my first training mission as a Cadet Platoon Leader in "Charlie" Company. I had left my buddies vulnerable on the fake battlefield and had sworn not to ever do that again. But this was real and I didn't come through. I had trained for six months at Basic Combat Training and Advanced Individual Training, than four years as an officer candidate in the Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC), followed by five moths of Officer Basic Course. Between specialty training, the national training center, mob station, Kuwait, left seat right seat ride… I joined the Army in 1996 and it was 2006. I had trained for nearly 10 years! Was that not enough? Was none of that training worth it?  
For the rest of the night we had it out. That moment was a turning point for me. Of all the lessons learned this lesson fundamentally changed the way I approached everything. The result was a determination to deal with risk deliberately. War is inherently, inevitably dangerous. Route clearance is unavoidably detrimental to one's life expectancy. But hand wave policies to deal with the danger and blanket declarations about how to plan for risk, potentially shift risk and do not actually mitigate it.  
So, should gunners be up? It depends. What is the risk? For the lead truck the greatest risk was a decapitating explosion from an improvised explosive device. Risk that was less present for gunners in the following vehicles especially if the first few trucks did their job of detecting and eliminating that threat. In order to deal with the risk of small arms fire, RPGs, and other external threats, gunners in the remaining vehicles would remain up. This was, of course a general concept but individual gunners were given autonomy to do their job, and mitigate the greatest risk, to the best of their ability.  
Should the other members of the patrol rush to the aid of a damaged vehicle? Again, it depends. We determined that if someone was in danger of their life, no matter the danger we would do all we could to rescue them. That did not mean that we would throw caution to the wind but it did mean we would accept prudent risk to rescue our buddies, whether from our platoon or other forces. We adopted a common, simple solution for communicating when radios were rendered inoperable from the shockwave of a blast. A red glow-stick against the window would show an immediate need for medical attention. Green would signify that rescuers could cautiously search for potential secondary explosions or an ambush prior to approaching the disabled vehicle. The use of a red chem-light was not to be employed lightly, because it meant the risk of others. A broken leg from a blast, for example, may be extremely painful and require medical attention but would not cause loss of life and attention could wait for a deliberate, thorough search.  
What else were we doing in the name of risk mitigation that was actually making our job more difficult and, in turn, actually making it less safe? The operator of the robotic arm on the Buffalo indicated that the bar armor used to mitigate the threat of RPGs blocked his ability to safely disarm IEDs. We analyzed data from thousands of missions and determined that, despite the attack on our lead truck just mentioned, the threat in the specific area in which we operated was very low. But that the risk of not finding an IED or not having the ability to see to disarm it was extremely high; so we removed the bar armor, to the horror of our leaders and peer clearance platoons, who could not understand why we would take off something designed to protect us. To me, it did not matter anymore what something was designed to do, It mattered what it actually did.  
We had sophisticated detection vehicles designed to detect metal in the ground but those vehicles had to be directly over the ordinance in order to detect it, a prospect that seemed counter to the idea of safely finding IEDs. Other teams used the vehicles with great success but we found greater success with other, less conventional, methods.  
Every aspect of every missions was analyzed to assess potential risk, determine the likelihood and severity of the threat, and develop a mitigation strategy.  
This moment defined our culture as a unit. We became adamant that we were the best unit to find a device and if we missed it, heaven forbid, we were the best equipped to take the hit.  
One night, my former Platoon Sergeant cornered me in the company command post. "You're getting pretty reckless out there." He scolded. I prided myself in being open to feedback and willing to adapt. Never did I expect the visceral response I felt from being called reckless. Were we unorthodox? Yes. Aggressive? Yes! Affective? Absolutely. But reckless? Absolutely not. Is route clearance dangerous? 100%. Is it risky? Not if mitigated properly.  
I do admit that we didn't balance well the long term risk to our force with the risk to our mission and the result was a culture of walking off things that probably required medical attention. It was a heavy price to pay for dedication to mission accomplishment and something that I still struggle with, recognizing that I should have done more to look after the long term effects of concussive blasts on my team.  
==Leaders must make decisions. That is what you are paid to do. There are plenty of smart talented capable people, who can do their job without you or even do your job better than you. None of that matters. You are in that position and you are the decision maker. If there is anything that sets you apart from anyone else with or without a fancy title, you have to make choices.==  
==The solution to a problem is rarely binary, one or the other, but a combination of the two or an answer outside of what either party considers.==  
==I want to be clear about our tactics and operating procedures. Some of what we implemented is well known or common sense. Some of what we did was not the right way for other successful teams to operate. The important thing is that it worked for us, at that time, in that situation. The idea is not to glean specific procedures but an overall better assessment of risk, how to avoid risk aversion while mitigating potential dangers.==  
==We cannot be afraid to try. Bounce back with a can do attitude.==