**Week 21 - Jun 10: The Hummingbird**  
_Theme: NTC Chaos & The OODA Loop_  
[Chapter Five: Part 3]  
"Come here, Lieutenant!" The Battalion Commander screamed. He was stern and never happy anyway, but he looked exceptionally pissed off. His eyes bugged out of sunken sockets reminding me of Judge Doom, the villain played by Christopher Lloyd in the 1988 film "Who Framed Roger Rabbit". Traffic piled up as a crane operator maneuvered jersey barriers into a traffic control point my platoon was establishing. I was running from place to place, flitting really. Lieutenant Higgins, the Company executive officer (XO), had dubbed me the hummingbird for good reason. Questions were coming from all sides. "Where do you want the wire?" "Do you really want those barrios there?" "We can't see around this corner, can we push our security up farther?" "Someone is watching us from the top of that hill; do you want us to go check it out?" "These people are not happy that we stopped traffic; can we let them go around until we get set up?" "Now that our security is in a position where we can see down the road, we no longer have visual contact with the rest of the group; what do you want us to do?" This was not going well and I didn't have time to appease the additional barrage of unhelpful questions I didn't have the answer to, from the Battalion Commander. What was he doing out here anyway? Did I mention this was not going well? Spoiler alert. It didn't get better. "Damn it Lieutenant, get over here!" I ran to him and snapped to attention. I would have saluted but we were in a field training exercise and It's not a good idea to alert the enemy as to who the leader is. Although, it would have been obvious from the next county away with his entourage milling around him and his peacocking about. "What are you doing, Lieutenant?" He spoke my rank as an insult. "Our orders are to establish a traffic control point here, Sir." "I know what your orders are, Lieutenant. They came from my staff." He spoke to me in an arrogant condescending tone, "I'm asking what you are doing?"  
I tried to clarify, "We have stopped traffic from the North and South along this route." I pointed, "Security is pushed out over there, and down there. Jersey barriers are being emplaced to create a search area down there. Concertina wire is being emplaced to create a serpentine to slow down traffic entering the search area." From our vantage point on the side of the hill we could see for miles, I pointed out the elements of the chaos unfolding below us. The high desert sagebrush didn't block any of the landscape and we could see vans, food trucks, semi-trucks, motorcycles, Humvees, and other military vehicles, piling up, easily over a hundred all together and more mounting. We were disrupting a lot of people's day and those with rank and authority were not happy. The observer controller trainer (OC/T) approached us coming up the hill with my platoon sergeant stepping to keep up hot on his heels. "Not all these vehicles are in play." He declared. "You can't block off the entire road" (This sounded familiar) "Well, how are we supposed to tell who we are supposed to stop and who we aren't?" I asked frustrated. "Those who are supposed to stop for the scenario will stop," the OC/T tried to reassure "but for the others, you have to create a bypass." "How do we know that those in the scenario won't just bypass the checkpoint with a claim that we didn't set up a good checkpoint?" I countered "We will take care of it," he assured again. The Battalion Commander looked at my Platoon Sergeant and said, "take care of it." The Platoon Sergeant glanced at me and I gave a slight nod. "Yes, Sir," he said to the Commander, spun on his heel, and was gone back down the hill with the OC/T. Traffic was already maneuvering around the crane. Radio news travels fast. I turned to look back at the Commander. I generally get along with everyone. I try to keep an open mind but this guy rubbed me the wrong way. He was incredibly knowledgeable about all things Army Engineers from construction to minefields but route clearance was new to the Army and as new to him. I had attended the Route Clearance / Route Reconnaissance Operator Course and then the Route Clearance / Route Reconnaissance Leader Course earlier that year. I think he was a little uncomfortable, as a leader, having subordinates that knew more than he did about the mission. But, this was not a route clearance mission and I wasn't impressing anyone with my knowledge or ability to lead. I was about to get a big slice of humble pie "Lieutenant Sparrow" he started again, still upset but slightly less condescending. "I am asking what YOU, the platoon leader, are doing. You, running around here frantic, are not instilling confidence in your platoon nor in your leaders. You appear disorganized and frankly you look like you don't have a clue what the hell you are doing" That was true. I didn't know what I was doing.  
We had been at the National Training Center in Fort Irwin, California, for over a week training for our upcoming deployment to Iraq where we would conduct route clearance operations. Route clearance is really a simple (not necessarily easy) task, go ahead of other units, find and clear explosive obstacles. After arriving and in-processing at NTC and getting our gear and vehicles ready we began STX, situational training exercises (pronounced "sticks"). In that time most of our missions were route clearance related, but we didn't have the right equipment to truly clear routes, so most of our missions were more like presence patrols through the dessert. If we did find something, we spent hours in the Mojave sun waiting for an explosives ordnance disposal (EOD) team to come take care of it. The only thing we were honestly training on, was patience. After a particularly long and frustrating time of eating the dust from the vehicle in front of me and wondering just how this was getting my platoon and me ready for combat, it was already dark when I got back to the Company command post (CP). "You have a TCP mission tomorrow," my buddy, and fellow platoon leader, informed me as I approached. "Ok," I shook my head as if I understood. But I didn't understand. "TCP, what does that stand for?" I wondered. "Here’s your order for tomorrow's mission" SFC Bamog handed me a piece of paper as I entered the tent. "Traffic Control Point, why are we doing a TCP?" I asked. "Because you might have to do it in Iraq." CPT Johnson chimed in proudly as if it was his idea. CPT Johnson was a tanker before becoming an engineer. He was easily the most tactically savvy officer I had worked for in my short carrier to that point. He didn't care for me much. "Here is some reference material. Brief me on your plan in one hour." "Roger, Sir" I responded crisply. "Oh boy, a whole hour, Thank you," I thought sarcastically. The one page order read more like a wedding invitation, than an order.  
"Mr. and Mrs. Governor and Military Leader are pleased to announce the presence of terrorists smuggling explosive material along route Iron. We respectfully request the presence of 2nd Platoon B Company at the provided grid location AB12345678 to provide a traffic control point in their honor. As a party favor, a tractor trailer carrying six Jersey barriers, and 15 rolls of concertina wire will be sponsored by the 123 logistics company. Link up with them at date/time (the next morning) to provide escort."(ok that's not exactly how it was written, but pretty close.) I looked at the grid on the map. It was hard to miss. The main asphalt road went out from our location due North for several miles across the flat high dessert until it passed along the side of a substantial hill in the middle of the large valley where the road turned to the North West and continued straight for several more miles. Easy, drive 'til you get to the hill with the bend in the road. The material the CO (Commanding Officer) gave me described the process for standoff in order to provide security and escalation of force if needed. Again, easy, drive to the hill with the bend in the road put out some wire, stop traffic, search the vehicles, and send them on their way. I huddled quickly with my team and gave them a heads up. A few of my Soldiers had attended a search course and had some working knowledge of how to perform the mission but we had never done it full scale before, and we had never set it up. They were always up for a challenge and it wasn't driving aimlessly through the desert the next day, so they were on board. I gave a quick brief to the CO, mostly regurgitating the little information provided in the order and the material he provided me. I understood the concept but honestly did not have a grasp of how it would unfold. I was hungry and tired. I managed to scrap together a few left-overs from the cooks who had long since stopped serving dinner chow by that point and laid down on my cot. Soldiers stirring around me rustled me awake. "Crap, we gotta figure out this link up with the Jersey barriers and wire." were my first thoughts. Fortunately, for all of us, my Platoon Sergeant was out late and up early coordinating supplies. We jumped in our vehicles and were off to the hill at the bend in the road. "Here's the grid." the lead vehicle commander announced as we slowed. "Let's get set up." I declared and jumped out.  
The scene was chaos in action. Soldiers tried to stop traffic. Capable vehicles ignored the blockade and bypassed the pileup by swinging wide out around us through the desert. Suddenly a thousand questions that I didn't have the answers to, were directed at me. "Are we supposed to stop all of these vehicles?" "What about military vehicles?" "What if they don't stop or try to bypass?" "Are we supposed to use escalation of force on our own forces if they don't comply?" Tension mounted and the presence of the Battalion Commander (BC) did not help. He had more questions. "Where is your Platoon Leader?" "He's around here somewhere." an unsure Soldier proclaimed. "I think he's showing them were to put the wire," another Soldiers tried to be helpful. The BC spotted me energetic, motivated, running around and summoned me.  
The BC lectured me about not remaining in a central location where people could find me; where I could receive and disseminate information. "Officers don't run" he scolded me. "Officers are calm in the chaos." I wasn't sure he was right about officers never running, but his sentiment was right. The leader must be in a position where he/she can make decisions and instill confidence. The greater lesson for me was swarming in my mind. This chaos could all have been avoided if I, as the leader, had spent more time working and communicating a clear plan. I looked around. The traffic control point was coming together with little help from me. Planning and rehearsals could have saved us a lot of headaches. I should have anticipated questions and addressed concerns before we got to this point. As I stood there receiving my verbal reprimand, a puff of white powder spilled out of the vehicle at the center of the control point, a simulated explosion. The call of MASSCAL came over the radio. A MASSCAL or mass casualty situation is one in which injuries overwhelms the medical personnel at the scene.3 This was a disaster, a potentially avoidable disaster, and I led us into it.  
The leader has to be calm under pressure. Confidence can be bolstered through knowledge and preparation.  
Most importantly the leader has to anticipate. That means a big portion of a leader's time on mission or project is in the planning and preparation. Sometimes that means working long hours, especially in the beginning to anticipate questions anticipate problems resources solutions and provide clear intent that can then be executed without you overseeing the minute details.