Should gunners in the vehicles be up or down? If the gunner is up, in the turret, they run the risk of being shot or hit by fragmentation from an explosive blast, rocket, or rocket propelled grenade (RPG). If a gunner is down, inside the vehicle, they may miss the opportunity to engage the triggerman, to deter an attack current or future from happening altogether.  
If a vehicle is attacked by an improvised explosive device (IED), should the other members of the patrol rush to the aid of those in the struck vehicle, even at the risk of exposure to a potential secondary explosion or the initiation of the actual ambush? Or, should the patrol cautiously, deliberately search for secondary devices, at the risk of not aiding a fallen and potentially dyeing comrade?  
As we trained for combat, these, and other similar questions about risk, came up again and again, and we hotly debated them. These questions were fundamental to how we would operate in theater. But the argument was so contentious that the platoon leader, 2LT Sparrow, avoided making a decision and deferred that we would "wait and see" how the unit we replaced operated, then adopt a similar strategy.  
Upon arrival to Ramadi, the issues, and associated contention, had not been resolved. The unit we replaced operated principally with the gunners down inside the vehicles; which did not satisfy the intense emotions of those who felt that we had come so far away from our families to a combat zone to make a difference, not to simply to survive. They wanted to eliminate the IEDs by eliminating those who buried the devices in the road, not simply remove IEDs from the roads night after night. The risk for them was of not eliminating the threat at the source resulting in more IEDs and in turn greater chance of getting hit by the explosives.  
Staff Sergeant (SSG) Hale, the squad leader for first squad, spent several years in the Marines before shifting to the Army Reserve. He joined the, less than a handful, of combat veterans in our platoon. Others concurred, but SSG Hale most vocally advocated an aggressive posture. His perspective differed drastically from that of Sergeant First Class (SFC) Hartman, our Platoon Sergeant, who adopted a more cautious approach.  
18 October 2006, just after sunset, we left Camp Ramadi through Ogden Gate on our first patrol without participants from the unit we replaced. Five vehicles turned left in succession onto Route Michigan and crossed the bridge over the huge cannel that spurred from the Euphrates River, the cradle of civilization. We paused briefly to pick up the Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) Technician, Staff Sergeant Bratcher, from the Marine Base, Hurricane Point (HP). Then we turned Southeast, and moved toward OP VA (Observation Point Virginia). It was our first mission on our own and excitement, more than tension, ran high. It felt oddly familiar already, after nearly two weeks of similar missions. Still within range of the weapons at Hurricane Point we joked a little and psyched ourselves up for what we would face ahead.  
Suddenly a massive explosion cracked, ripping through the new night. In a flash of fire the lead RG-31, mine resistant vehicle, once a beacon of search lights, went instantly black. The radio fell silent. "Wolf 2-1, Wolf 2-6, are you ok, over." 2LT Sparrow called in a panicked voice. Everyone froze, holding their breath. The silence was deafening, and highlighted the ringing in our ears from the concussive blast. Nothing happened for what seemed like minutes. The rear truck burst passed the other vehicles and pulled beside the smoking lead truck. Sergeant (SGT) Krier spoke to the occupants from the turret of his truck. "6,3, they're shaken up but they're all ok." The vehicle commander reported. We finally breathed. A rocket propelled grenade had been fired from down an ally, concealed from HP, and struck the truck just in front of the driver. It must have skipped off the adjacent barrier miss-shaping the cone and rendering the explosively formed projectile inoperable, which kept it from penetrating deep into the crew cab, potentially killing all inside. The shockwave of the explosion was no less violent, concussing the occupants, frying the alternator, and knocking out all electronics.  
From behind us, we could already hear the Marine wrecker crew from Hurricane Point spinning up. We cannot thank enough those brave Marines, who we never formally met, for their courage and skill. We later dubbed them MAD MAX, for their speed at arriving on scene, calmness in a chaotic environment, with ability to hook up and recover any mess of twisted, blown up metal that once resembled a vehicle. MAD MAX arrived within minutes and in less time hooked up the vehicle and made its way to Camp Ramadi. The Marines made a quick call to postpone the rest of the mission that night and we all returned to base physically shaken and emotionally impacted. We pulled back into the same parking spots we left less than an hour before and exited our vehicles. Tension loomed thick in the air. We stood in a circle to conduct an after action review as we did after every mission. Bitterness in the team after what had just transpired meant not everyone felt they wanted to be a part of the circle and stood a few steps back. 2LT Sparrow always allowed the lowest ranking individual on the mission to speak first.  
"Privet McKeen, What do you want to say" he asked glancing at SSG Hale who looked like he wanted to punch the Lieutenant in the face and rip his throat out. Privet McKeen had driven the rear vehicle; the only one to rush up to the aid of those in the damaged truck. "Honestly, Sir," he hesitated.  
"Yes, honestly.“ he paused, ”Say what you wanna' say," LT encouraged.  
"Sir," PVT McKeen paused, then he went for it. "Sir, that was F***ed up!" LT Sparrow looked at him to show he was listening and nodded that he should continue. "Brown just took a rocket to the face and everyone just sat there. You just sat there, Sir. You did nothing! You are the leader, and you directed nothing. Thank God everyone is ok, but they might not have been." It stung, but he was right; the Platoon Leader (PL) froze. Except for the actions of PVT McKeen and his truck, we all froze at a critical moment and it was the PL's fault. He had hesitated to make critical decisions about how we would deal with risk and the result was, that despite nearly a year of training, when it came right down to it, we weren’t ready. We didn't react. "Anyone else?" LT Sparrow managed to ask. SSG Hale could bite his tongue no longer. "What the hell was that? You left us out there! You better damn well believe that if that was one of you, I would have risked my life to get up to you. At least some of you I can trust" He looked at SSG Heddlesten who commanded the rescuing truck, then back at LT Sparrow and at SFC Hartman. "Our so-called leaders are going to get us all killed."  
"Hold on Sergeant" SFC Hartman tried to jump in to defend himself and the platoon leader.  
“You hold on…” SSG Hale fired back. The ensuing argument almost came to blows several times between SFC Hartman and SSG Hale, as they both expressed compelling reasons for rushing in to aid a downed team member versus the risk of being another victim for others to rescue.  
For the rest of the night we had it out. With the mission cancelled it was the best thing we could do. That moment became a turning point for the platoon. The result was a determination to deal with risk deliberately. War is inherently, inevitably, deliberately dangerous. Route clearance is unavoidably detrimental to one's life expectancy. But hand wave policies to deal with the danger and blanket declarations about how to plan for risk, at best, merely shift risk, and do not actually mitigate it.  
Should gunners be up? The answer, for us: "it depends". What is the risk? For the lead truck, we determined the greatest risk, most of the time, to be a decapitating explosion from an improvised explosive device; risk that was less present for gunners in the following vehicles, especially if the first few trucks did their job of detecting and eliminating that threat. In order to deal with the risk of small arms fire, RPGs, and other external threats, gunners in the remaining vehicles would remain up. This was, of course, a general concept. Individual gunners and truck commanders were given autonomy to do their job, and to change their posture to mitigate the greatest risk, to the best of their ability, as the threat changed or evolved, such as at a halt.  
Should the other members of the patrol rush to the aid of a damaged vehicle? Again, it depends. We determined that if someone was in danger of their life, no matter the danger to ourselves, we would do all we could to rescue them, including risking of our own lives. That did not mean that we would throw caution to the wind, but it did mean we would accept prudent risk to rescue our buddies, whether from our platoon or from other forces. We adopted a common, simple solution for communicating when radios were rendered inoperable from the shockwave of a blast. A red glow-stick against the window would show an immediate need for medical attention. Green would signify that rescuers could cautiously search for potential secondary explosions or an impending ambush prior to approaching the disabled vehicle. The use of a red chem-light was not to be employed lightly, because it meant great risk to others. A broken leg from a blast, for example, may be extremely painful and require medical attention but would not cause loss of life and therefore attention could wait for a deliberate, thorough search and the occupants would display a green chem-light.  
What else were we doing in the name of risk mitigation that was actually making our job more difficult and, in turn, actually making it less safe? The operator of the robotic arm on the Buffalo indicated that the bar armor used to mitigate the damage from RPGs, blocked his ability to safely interrogate IEDs. So we immediately engineered a way to remove a section of the armor from blocking his view. We then analyzed data from thousands of missions and determined that, despite the attack on our lead truck just mentioned, the threat of an RPG attack in the specific area in which we operated was very low. In contrast, the risk of not finding an IED, or not having the ability to see to disarm them, was extremely high; so we removed the bar armor completely, to the horror of our leaders and peer clearance platoons, who could not understand why we would take off something designed to protect us. To us, it did not matter anymore what something was designed to do; it mattered what it actually did.  
This moment defined our culture as a unit. Every aspect of every missions was analyzed to assess potential risk, determine the likelihood and severity of the threat, and develop a mitigation strategy. We had sophisticated detection vehicles designed to identify metal in the ground, but those vehicles had to be directly over the ordnance in order to detect it, a prospect that seemed counter to the idea of safely finding IEDs. Other teams used the vehicles with great success but we found greater success with other, less conventional, methods. We became adamant that we were the best unit to find a device and, if we missed it, heaven forbid, we were the best equipped to take the hit. The Marines who followed us on most missions, rode in armored HUMMVEEs, not nearly as equipped to survive an IED blast as our mine resistant vehicles.  
Our Battalion Commander and operations team thought it important for us to become familiar with as many of the routes as possible. We disagreed. We became extremely territorial. For us, the ability to find IEDs come down to our ability to detect change. Like spying "what's different" in a children's activity book, finding IEDs became synonymous with phases like, "that wasn't there yesterday" and "that doesn't look right". That meant that we were more likely than anyone to find IEDs on roads with which we were most familiar.  
The First Battalion of the Sixth Marine Regiment entered theater at nearly the same time we did. As they learned their sector of the city, we cleared routes for them a few times. Then one a night, as we cleared in support of another unit, another platoon from our Battalion cleared for the 1/6 Marines. After the mission the Marines approached us. "We would like to form a habitual relationship with your team," they proposed. "Other clearance teams are doing a great job but we like the way you operate and we think we work well together". We felt flattered and thrilled. 1/6 went so far as to plan operations around our clearance schedule which further solidified our respect, trust, and confidence in them.  
A few months into the deployment, a platoon leader from another company approached us about some routes in the part of the city where we frequently conducted patrols. "Why are you asking about 'Race Track'" LT Sparrow asked confused. Route Race Track was named for the same reason an enormous friend is called 'tiny'. We never got very far very fast on route racetrack without finding IEDs to slow us down.  
"We have a mission out there tonight." He replied, matter-of-factly, not understanding the gravity of what that meant. We were furious. LT Sparrow called the Marines,  
"What's going on tonight?" he asked, sounding like a guy asking his girlfriend who was going out with a old flame "what are you two doing tonight?", trying not to sound as jealous and helpless as he felt.  
"We have to do this op (operation) tonight. We have actionable intelligence, we need to execute. Your Battalion told us you were unavailable when we asked for you." We had a day of scheduled maintenance for our vehicles. Yes, technically on our schedule, but nothing we could not postpone for something important. LT Sparrow marched up to speak with the operations team.  
“Why is ‘Charlie’ working my AO (area of operations) tonight?and why don’t I know about it?” he demanded  
"Your platoon is not the only team in the country that can do route clearance." the assistant operations officer contended.  
"true", LT agreed, "but we are the most capable to clear that route at this time." The argument got heated until the staff officer finally put an end to it.  
"You need to stand down Lieutenant. Charlie Company is taking this one, you are doing maintenance and you don’t have time to spin up for this mission at this point”. He was right, and the smug look on his face said that there was no remorse or understanding of the gravity of the situation. He appeared pleased to put 2/B’s perceived ego in check and to push the mission to another platoon.  
We passed on all the knowledge we could in the short time we had by looking at maps and imagery, but it was not enough. A Soldier from that clearance team died that night from injuries sustained from an IED blast. They never saw it. In-fact, they contended for a time that it must have been a rocket propelled grenade. Forensic evidence proved otherwise. 2nd Platoon, B Company, could have been out there, should have been out there, and yes might have met the same fate. It might have been our team that lost a Soldier that night. We will never know for certain. But we do know that we would have been familiar enough with the route to recognize the signs and we are convinced we would have found it before it detonated.  
Perhaps an air of confidence, that could be construed as arrogance, exudes from that statement. First, we acknowledge an overabundance of confidence. Driving around night after night, looking for things that could kill you, requires trust in your skills, equipment, and team, but confidence in your ability and knowledge only keeps you alive for so long, because the enemy always gets a vote. He is learning, attempting to be one step ahead, in order to kill you. To counter the enemy you must be adaptive, and to do that, you have to be sufficiently humble and open to new ideas, new tactics, and admit you don't know everything. That is the true dichotomy, Humble Confidence.  
That Soldier's death solidified, for us, everything we thought we knew. "This isn't little league where everyone gets to play," SSG Hale reminded us frequently, "people's lives are on the line." Protecting those who came behind us was our mission, was our "why", was the reason we got out there every day. In order to do it, we could not be risk averse. We had to accept prudent risk. Human life is infinitely valuable, we concur, but cannot be so valuable as to compromise the lives of generations to come. The question has to be asked: “How many years will we fight this war?” It’s not rhetorical. We want to know.
 
A dichotomy faces American military leaders, that is not new, nor is it unique to America, nor is it truly unique to military leaders. Mission vs. Men, the accomplishment of the objective vs. the safety of the force, reward vs. risk. We knew commanders who made unrealistic promises to bring everyone home. Ironically, trying to protect them sometimes actually led to their demise. Heavy armor, while it protects, slows a Soldier down, makes them more vulnerable to attack, and less agile to make a counter attack. So, it is a balance of identifying all risk and mitigating it to the best extent possible. Many ask: "What is the cost of winning?" But we ask: "What is the price to stay on the field without a clear path to victory?"  
One night, our former Platoon Sergeant cornered LT Sparrow in the company command post. "You're getting pretty reckless out there." He scolded. LT Sparrow considered himself open to feedback and willing to adapt. Never did he expect the visceral response he felt from being called reckless. The only thing worse would be to call him a liar or a coward. Were we unorthodox? Yes. Aggressive? Yes! Affective? Absolutely. But reckless? Absolutely not. Is route clearance dangerous? 100%. Is it risky?… there is inherent risk in driving to the store to get milk but that risk is mitigated by wearing a seatbelt or a helmet depending on your mode of transportation. Even walking to the store requires looking both ways. Ironically route clearance is the mitigation of someone else’s risk.  
In an additional twist of irony (spoiler alert), we did all make it home. But was bringing them all home enough? We write this book, in part, because we are uncertain about the answer to that question.
 
The Marines we worked for had a policy that anyone involved in a blast would be removed from missions for a two week period. Anyone involved in three blasts would be removed from missions permanently. That type of policy was laughable for our unit. Within the first two weeks of missions, 18 out of the 30 members of the platoon had been directly involved in at least one explosion targeting their vehicle. By that two week mark, three of them, including the platoon leader, SSG Brummett, and SPC Lewellen, had already received five blasts; nearly double the amount that would render them mission incapable for the rest of the deployment. This high rate of direct contact, coupled with a can do, and should do, platoon attitude, led to a platoon culture where injuries did not get reported. No one directed it, but it was understood that Soldiers were expected to "man up" and "walk off" having their "bell rung", and "self-medicate" for headaches from blasts. Soldiers went so far as to memorize the answers to the Military Acute Concussion Evaluation, or MACE test, in order to continue on patrols rather than be removed from missions. The MACE test was designed as a quick way to evaluate short term memory loss associated with concussions. But by memorizing the answers and thus storing the information in long term memory, Soldiers could repeat back information making themselves appear to be concussion free.  
When one member of the Platoon did report to the doctor for a concussion, he received a Purple Heart for the explosive encounter, entitling him to the prestige of the medal and, maybe more importantly, any required medical care associated with that injury for the rest of his life. It normally would have been an honor, but the platoon mocked him and ostracized him for not conforming. When he received a third Purple Heart and became non-mission capable, under other circumstances he would have been praised for his service, but again, his platoon looked down on him for not toughing it out.  
We did what we felt we had to do to accomplish the mission and protect those who may have lost life or limb and not simply lived with tinnitus and tremors. It was a heavy price to pay for dedication to mission accomplishment and something that we still struggle with today. This is, in part, why we wrote this book. We want to tell our unbelievable story of how we carried on in the face of adversity. We want to tell our story, even if no one reads it, we want it to be told. We do not regret the service rendered, only that, on occasion, we lament not hedging against the long term effects of combat.