**Week 31 - Aug 19: Gunners Up vs. Down**  
_Theme: Analysis Paralysis (The RPG Hit)_  
[Chapter Seven: Part 2]  
Should gunners in the vehicles be up or down? If a gunner is up, in the turret, he runs the risk of being shot or hit by fragmentation from an explosive blast, rocket, or rocket propelled grenade. If a gunner is down, inside the vehicle, he may miss the opportunity to engage the triggerman or deter an attack from happening all together.  
If a vehicle is struck by an IED, should the other members of the patrol rush to their aid, at the risk of exposure to a secondary explosion and the initiation of the actual ambush? or should the patrol cautiously search for secondary devices, at the risk of not aiding a fallen and potentially dyeing comrade?  
As we trained for combat these and other questions came up again and again, and were hotly debated. These questions were fundamental to how we would operate in theater. But the argument was so contentious that I, as the platoon leader, avoided making a decision and deferred that we would "wait and see" how the unit we replaced operated, then adopt a similar strategy.  
Upon arrival to Ramadi, the issues, and the contention with them, had not been resolved. The unit we replaced operated with the gunners down inside the vehicles; which did not satisfy those who felt that we had come so far away from our families to a combat zone to make a difference, not to simply survive. They wanted to eliminate the IEDs by eliminating those who buried the devices in the road, not simply remove IEDs night after night at the risk of not finding them or getting hit by the explosives.  
SSG Hale, the squad leader for first squad, spent several years in the Marines before shifting to the Army Reserve, joining the handful of combat veterans in our platoon. He was one of the most vocal proponents of an aggressive posture. His perspective differed drastically from SFC Hartman, our Platoon Sergeant, who adopted a more cautious approach.  
18 October, just after sunset, we left Ogden Gate, turned left, crossed the cannel, picked up SSG Bratcher, turned Southeast, and moved toward OP VA, as we were now accustomed. Suddenly a flash of light and massive explosion ripped through the young night. We were still within the range fan of Hurricane Point and caught completely off guard by the attack. The lead RG31, mine resistant vehicle, once a beacon of search lights, went instantly dark, the radio fell silent. "Wolf 2-1, Wolf 2-6, are you ok, over." I called panicked. Everyone froze, holding their breath. The silence was deafening, and highlighted the ringing in our ears from the concussive blast. Nothing happened for what seemed like minutes. Then the rear truck burst passed us and pulled beside the smoking darkened vehicle. SGT Krier spoke to the occupants from the turret. "6,3 they're shaken up but they're all ok." I finally breathed. A rocket propelled grenade fired from an ally struck the truck just in front of the driver. It must have skipped off the adjacent barrier, miss-shaping the cone, rendering the explosively formed projectile inoperable, and keeping it from penetrating deep into the crew cab killing all inside. The concussion of the explosion was no less violent, frying the alternator and knocking out all electronics.  
From behind me, I could hear the Marine wrecker crew from Hurricane Point spinning up. (I pause briefly to thank those brave Marines, whom I never formally met, for their courage and skill.) We later dubbed them MAD MAX for their speed at arriving on scene, calmness in any chaotic environment, and ability to hook up and recover any mess of twisted, blown up metal that once resembled a vehicle. MAD MAX arrived within minutes and in less time they had the vehicle hooked up and on its way back to Camp Ramadi. The Marines determined to postpone the mission and we all returned to base. We pulled back into the parking spots we left less than an hour before and exited our vehicles. Tension loomed thick in the air. We stood in a circle to conduct an after action review as we did after every mission. Bitterness in the team after what had just transpired meant not everyone felt they wanted to be a part of the circle and stood a few steps back. I always allowed the lowest ranking individual to speak first. "Privet McKeen, What do you want to say" I asked glancing at SSG Hale who looked like he wanted to rip my throat out. Privet McKeen had driven the rear vehicle; the only one to rush up to the aid of those in the damaged truck. "Honestly, Sir," he hesitated. "Yes, say what you wanna' say," I encouraged. "Sir," he paused again, then went for it. "Sir, that was F***ed up! Brown just took a rocket to the face and everyone just sat there. You just sat there, Sir. You did nothing! You are the leader, and you directed nothing. Thank God everyone is ok, but they might not have been." It stung, but he was right; I froze. Except for the actions of PVT McKeen and his truck, we all froze at a critical moment and it was my fault. I had hesitated to make critical decisions about how we would deal with risk and the result was, that despite nearly a year of training, when it came right down to it, we didn't react. "Anyone else?" I managed to ask. SSG Hale could bite his tongue no longer. "What the hell was that? You left us out there! You better damn well believe that if that was one of you, I would have risked my life to get up to you. At least some of you I can trust" He looked at SSG Heddlesten who commanded the rescuing truck, then back at me and SFC Hartman. "Our leaders are going to get us all killed." "Hold on Sergeant Hale" SFC Hartman tried to jump in to defend himself and me. The ensuing argument almost came to blows between SFC Hartman and SSG Hale several times as they both expressed compelling reasons for rushing in to aid a downed team member versus the risk of being another victim for others to rescue.  
As my platoon erupted into chaos, miss trust, and resentment, my mind went back to my first training mission as a Cadet Platoon Leader in "Charlie" Company. I had left my buddies vulnerable on the fake battlefield and had sworn not to ever do that again. But this was real and I didn't come through. I had trained for six months at Basic Combat Training and Advanced Individual Training, than four years as an officer candidate in the Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC), followed by five moths of Officer Basic Course. Between specialty training, the national training center, mob station, Kuwait, left seat right seat ride… I joined the Army in 1996 and it was 2006. I had trained for nearly 10 years! Was that not enough? Was none of that training worth it?