**Week 28 - Jul 29: The Meerkat Pilot**  
_Theme: Porath: Neurodiversity & Wrecking things._  
[Chapter Six: Part 5]  
SSG Heddlested was fiercely loyal to that team, even to blows, which may be a story for another book. He was even ferociously loyal to SPC Porath, who got along with no one. SPC Porath possessed zero social skills. His attitude was atrocious. Yet SSG Heddlesten, his squad leader, was determined to make him part of the team. He was determined that SPC Porath had some skill to contribute. “He’s fearless”, SSG Heddlesten told us on multiple occasions. “He’s stupid and he doesn’t know any better,” Hale insisted bluntly, with whom no one disagreed. “He will do whatever you ask him to do. If you say, 'Porath, I need you to drive that Meerkat to the bottom of the Euphrates River and scan for IEDs' he will say, 'roger' and go do it. He may complain about it, but he will do it." Then Heddlesten stuck his arms out in front of him as if he held a steering wheel, mimicking SPC Porath driving his Meerkat grumbling senselessly "raza frazza Meerkat, stupid, shafaza," he stutter stepped forward, crouching down hands out in front of him now angled towards the floor as if driving down. His grumbling became gargling as he duck walked around pretending to scan underwater. After a few passes back and forth and a few circles for good measure he slowly stood up straight as he walked, arms angled upward, driving up the other bank of the imaginary river still grumbling. “No IEDs down there, Sir.”  
SPC Porath had gotten the job of driving the Meerkat because it was a one man vehicle. Since no one could stand to be in the same room as him, an isolated capsule seemed like a potential fit. I don’t know how Heddlesten convinced me to allow Porath to continue to drive the Meerkat. Frankly I don’t know how he talked me into letting him drive it in the first place after he had managed to wreck one at the Route Reconnaissance/Clearance Operator Course at Fort Leonard Wood, MO. Once in Ramadi, he spent more time wrecking than he did driving. Porath had driven and wrecked everything our platoon owned and some of the things owned by other platoons. He tipped a vehicle on its side once, burying the vehicle in the mud to such an extent that it covered the hatch and he trapped himself inside. It took hours to dig him out, upright the vehicle, and recover it from the self-dug grave. But somehow SSG Heddlesten continued to convince me, and somehow I continued to convince the commander, MAJ T, that it was ok. One evening while leaving out Ogden Gate of Camp Ramadi, SPC Porath got too far behind and lost track of the vehicle in front of him in the dust. Rather than slow down and let the dust clear, he sped forward to catch up and ran smack into a barrier. The rear truck watched the carnage unfold and called for everyone to halt over the radio. "Meerkat, Wolf 2/3, are you ok?" “I’m bleeding” was his only response he gave over the radio. It was not nearly as dire as it sounded. He bumped his head on the mount that held his night vision goggles which scratched him above his eyebrow. A tiny trickle of blood dripped into his eye. The damage to the vehicle was not overrated, however. The price tag of nearly $100,000 ensured no amount of persuasion from his squad leader would convince anyone to let him drive again. The damage to the platoon’s egos was unbearable, after being defeated by a barrier at the gate, not the enemy. The mission was ultimately cancelled and so were Porath's driving days. It was finally clear that driving was not his strength. Porath spent some time in the motor pool trying to help fix trucks when they came in damaged from missions. He had some knack at fixing things and could have done well at this, but could not get along with any of the mechanics or the rest of the platoon staying back to fix trucks.  
About that time I was frustrated by chronic communication problems. As we shifted in and out of different battle-space owner's territory we had to communicate quickly on various shifting frequencies. We had some platoon members with decent understanding of radios but I wanted someone who could be the platoon radio guru; someone who could focus almost solely on commo (short for communications). Someone that I could know was the guy I would go to, to fix whatever problem I had. When SSG Heddlesten recommended Porath I baulked immediately, thinking of all the things he could break. I explained that I needed someone I could count on and someone that could actually do the job. SSG Hale, who was particularly good at being blunt and honest, said, “Look, we all hate Porath, but he is actually pretty good with commo” everyone else nodded their heads in agreement. “Well,” I thought, “at least he won’t have to drive it”.  
In the lead-up to operation Battle Torch, part of the larger operation Marne Torch, LTC Adgie, "Battle 6", held a combined arms rehearsal. "Alright" he spoke in a low gruff voice. "I think we're ready. I have just one major concern. The COMSEC changes over right at a critical part of the operation. How do we maintain op tempo and ensure we can communicate?" He looked at the signal officer (S6).  
Our radios operated on alternating frequencies. The frequencies "hopped" in sync but the hopping pattern was changed periodically, making it difficult to crack and thus difficult too intercept radio communication. The commander's concern was, that if we had to pause to reestablish communication we could lose momentum and potentially lose the ability to talk to each other all together. Before each mission we verified we could communicate with each other. In this case, someone could lose coms and be a hazard on the battlefield instead of an asset.  
The S6 danced around the question without an amenable solution. A couple of leaders from other units chimed in, more with concerns than viable solutions. I raised my hand. "What'd you got Wolf" LTC Adgie asked curiously but a little annoyed. "Once we get the new COMSEC key I have a SPC who loads it onto a separate channel on the radio. At the designated time we just change the channel on the radio and we're on the new COMSEC" They all looked at me as if there were no way it was that easy. "Dog on it CPT" he looked at the S6 "Why is it that some Specialist with the engineers from the National Guard can figure this out when all my smartest como people can't make it happen. You should get your money back from that computer science degree.” He looked over at me but continued to talk to his S6, ”Have your guys get with the route clearance team and make it happen." He made intentional eye contact with me and said, "You're a great American Wolf!" His eyes said, ”here’s a chance to show what you can do.”  
SPC Porath implemented a communication plan though all the units. At the designated time everyone changed the Chanel and held their breath. It worked. No loss of communication. The operation was a huge success. Porath had finally found his knitch; something where he could work independently and where he could be an asset to the team.  
As mentioned previously, Jim Collins in “Good to Great” advocated getting the right people on the bus and the wrong people off.4 This is a case of getting the right people in the right seats. Gallup shares a similar sentiment in ”Strength Finders“ and "Now Discover Your Strengths." It is critical as a leader to maximize strengths and manage weaknesses.