**PHASE 5: THE OFFICER (Training for War)**  
**Week 19 - May 27: The Tree Across the Road**  
_Theme: Command Presence vs. Confusion_  
[Chapter Five: Leaders Make It Happen]  
My first Battle Assembly with C Company I was not as prepared to be a leader as they were prepared to make me a leader. A Soldier led the way for me through a big field next to the Reserve Center to a large dirt berm. On the other side of the berm I was surprised to see so many Soldiers preparing for a mock mission. "Here’s your platoon" he directed. 25 or so guys stood in a circle all looking at me. They acted as if they hung on my every word as I stammered through an on-the-fly plan. They showed confidence in me that I was unworthy of, and I felt it. We loaded into vehicles and began our mock patrol down a dirt road through the open field. I rode in a HMMWV with two 113 armored personnel carriers (APC) in front of me filled with combat engineers. Suddenly, as we passed a lone tree, a loud boom shattered the calm, routine feeling I had. A powder landmine exploded under the lead vehicle, followed immediately by the "pop, pop, pop" of gunfire as ambushers fired blank ammunition from the tall grass on the side of the road. I had not realized that we would run into any opposing forces (OPROR). I had thought we were just going to take a short drive around the site, practice convoy and radios procedures, and be done. Now we were under attack. I was overwhelmed. “What do you want us to do?” They asked me. I was the leader. But I panicked. I ordered the other two vehicles to go around the “disabled” vehicle. We sped around and out of the “kill zone”. I left them there, not knowing the extent of their "injuries". The scenario got worse for me as opposing force captured one of our Soldiers. They produced a rough note of propaganda demanding ransom, prompting a raid and the subsequent liberation of the incarcerated Soldier; not to be completed without a full fanfare return celebration. They laughed and high-fived. It was an insignificant training exercise. The rest of the guys were good sports about it. I am likely the only person there that still remembers it. But I didn’t celebrate. I was sick. That exercise impacted me so profoundly that it became one of the driving forces for writing this book. I had buckled under pressure. I had left a fallen comrades on the field of battle. I had failed. I still feel sick to think about it. I swore that I would never do such a thing again.  
You don’t always get it right the first time. Practice everything you can before you do it for real… as always, learn.  
A second note, I’ve written some already about how critical it is for a leader to have the trust of those who follow. Trust can be increased in many ways, one of which is demonstrated competence, which can be build through multiple iterations with continued improvement.  
“What are we doing?” the team leader asked annoyed and impatient. “What does it look like we are doing? We’re standing here in the middle of the woods waiting to get dead, because no one knows what we're doing". I thought. Fortunately, this was a training exercise, so the threat of actual loss of life was not eminent. The scenario was made up but the frustration was real, and mounting quickly.  
It was fall of 2005, in the woods of Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. To qualify to be Engineer Officers we took turns serving as the leader of the platoon, and in various other leadership capacities, as part of a final field exercise/evaluation. In this particular scenario, the platoon leader, one of my peers in charge of 30 or so of us for that mission, gave a rushed brief, which I didn’t truly understand. Before I had any real sense of our task, we were loaded into big, open back, Army trucks, and shuttled down a dirt road. Fortunately, I found myself in the same truck as the platoon leader and I began a barrage of questions from which I got vague responses that didn’t answer basic concerns, like "where are we going?" and "what are we doing?" The truck stopped and we piled out. Well, slowly climbed out. Everyone seemed overly concerned about securing the ladder to the truck before we dismounted, despite the supposed tactical scenario. I followed suit with everyone else as we gaggled away from the trucks into the woods in what I determined to be a North-ish direction along the dirt road. I was unsettled. Despite being a squad leader, in charge of about 10 other lieutenants for this mission, I still had no concept of the plan or what my part in it would be.  
We halted and the platoon leader, gesturing vaguely into the woods ahead of us, said, "Your squad will cordon the South side. I will go ahead with the search team". I nodded that I understood. The rest of the platoon stumbled on a Northeast trajectory into the woods as I continued directly North with my squad until reaching a rise in the ground that provided some cover and, from which, I could see a small group of buildings in a horseshoe pattern surrounded by the dense Mark Twain National Forest on all sides. The dirt road we came in on continued North, passing by the West side of the “village”. I indicated to my squad that we would halt here. The remainder of the platoon gaggled for a while, then moved toward the buildings. I stared at the backs of their heads as they “maneuvered” into the woods closer to the village. My frozen stupor was interrupted by one of the Lieutenants acting as my team leader for the mission as he asked, “What are we doing?” I was as annoyed, confused, and impatient as he. But despite what I wanted to say, “What does it look like we are doing? We’re standing here in the middle of the woods waiting to get dead, because no one knows what we're doing". What came out of my mouth was something that surprised even me, “We are the southern cordon for this cordon and search mission.”  
“Where do you want my team?” he asked, seeming to have gotten the clarity and confidence he needed from my short, matter of fact, statement. I thought, “Who cares, just stand wherever you want, take a nap, eat a snack, it doesn’t matter, this is a stupid mission with no plan anyway.” What I said instead was, “Take the right side of my position and have the other team take the left side.” Not a complicated or inspiring plan, but direction just the same, which he executed swiftly without any argument or delay.  
A few minutes later my other team leader approached me, again braking my stare into the village where the platoon leader was "sneaking" up to people who could clearly see that he was there. The normally thick woods were bare of leaves in the crisp late fall air. A few months prior the brush would have concealed a company a few meters in front of them. Now, one could observe from hundreds of meters away. The fact that I could see into the village meant that they probably could see my position. But this Platoon leader, I guess, thought he was being sneaky.  
“Do you want us to block off the road?” the team leader questioned. Again my thoughts were less than helpful. “What we do out here isn’t going to make a bit of difference. Are you even watching this? We’re all going to die anyway.” instead, I again managed to make a confident decision and directed boldly. “We are the Southern cordon for this cordon and search mission. Can you cordon off that side without blocking the road?” I asked almost rhetorically. “No” he replied a little sheepish. “Then block it off.” I said bluntly but not to aggressively. I focused my attention back onto the group of Lieutenants nearest the people in the village. I was too far away to hear them but they seemed to be attempting to communicate with the ”locals”. I watched for some time before my focus was again broken; this time by a voice of someone with authority. I turned quickly to pay attention. “Lieutenant Sparrow, what the hell are you doing.” CPT V addressed me sharply. Here was my chance to express my complete disgust for this entire mission. I thought that I was going to say, “Sir, I don’t know what I’m doing. This mission was broken before it got started.” What I said surprised me again. “My squad is cordoning off the South side of this village, Sir”  
“What are you doing on the road?” He clarified, getting to the heart of his question. “Sir, we cannot cordon off the area if we are letting traffic in and out”. I said confidently. “Lieutenant, there is civilian traffic trying to get through and you have half a tree across the road.” At that, I looked toward the road, probably for the first time. CPT V had understated by describing it as "half a tree". It looked more like a whole tree to me. I don’t know where they got it or, more impressively, how they moved it there, but there it was, a huge dead tree across the entire width of the road and cars were piling up on either side. “Sir, we’re here to do the mission we were given to the best of our ability…”I began my defense. CPT V stopped me, took a breath, and looked seriously at me. “I get what your trying to do Lieutenant…I get it. You can’t block off the road." I took a breath to plead my case again. "It’s not in play.” he said over his shoulder as he began to walk away. The look on his face told me this was the end of our conversation. I told the team leader to move the tree, "We can't bock off the road" I instructed. He could see that I had just been defeated so didn’t bother to ask any questions. It didn’t matter anyway. Moments later the sound of gun fire came from the buildings. What followed was, as I predicted, a massacre of our platoon at the hands of a couple of guys running circles around us in the woods and though the buildings. The slaughter may well have included my squad as well, although we were holding our own when the call of "ENDEX" (end exercise) saved us definitively before we found out. That didn't matter to me. Nor is it the point of the story. I was deep in contemplation about what had transpired. In the lack of real guidance and despite my own lack of confidence in the mission, I had managed to instill confidence in those I led. I had managed to do the right thing and execute a successful mission for my squad. It was at that moment that I realized the power of a leader. If I had said what I was thinking, those thoughts in that moment would not have been helpful. Dwelling on the problem creates nothing but more problems. Dwelling on a solution and executing to the best of our ability resulted in mission accomplishment, at least for that short period of time. – Leaders Make it Happen
 
**Week 20 - Jun 03: Water Jug Torture**  
_Theme: Grit, Sapper School, & The Central Governor_  
[Chapter Five: Part 2]  
With my family in Utah and me in Missouri, I spent time on two things, course work, and preparing myself physically for the Sapper Leader Course. According to the official website it is "a demanding 28-day leadership development course for combat engineers… training Soldiers in troop leading procedures, demolitions (conventional and expedient), and mountaineering operations. The course culminates in an intense field training exercise that reinforces the use of the battle drills and specialized engineer techniques lea2rned throughout the course." (From [https://home.army.mil/wood/index.php/units-tenants/USAES/Sapper](https://home.army.mil/wood/index.php/units-tenants/USAES/Sapper)) The bottom line, it is grueling physically and mentally and I wanted to be ready. I trained hard.  
"Listen up." CPT V. announced in his permanently annoyed tone. He definitely had an unexplained chip on his shoulder about something. I think he simply had little desire to be training Lieutenants when he could be a company commander deployed to Iraq or Afghanistan taking the fight to the enemy rather than “babysitting”.  
"You are here to compete for the limited number of training slots this class will get.We don't know how many, if any, that will be. To be clear, you are here because you are choosing to be here. If at any point you change your mind. Just get up, get in your car, and drive away. I will see you in class on Monday morning and I will never say another word to you about walking away today. For the next unknown number of hours it is my job to help you make up your mind that you do not want to be here. If you need water, get it, otherwise, there is no reason for you to be doing anything other than exactly what I tell you to do. Unless you quit. In that case, by all means, do whatever you want to do. Are there any questions?" Everyone was silent, Each preparing in their own way for the torture that was about to ensue, each resolving in their own way how to cope. "Here we go," I thought. "Here we go." CPT V announced as if he read my mind.  
For the next hour we manipulated our bodies into all manner of strenuous contortions. It's amazing how exhausting getting up and down off the ground can be. "Front! (do push ups), Back! (do flutter-kicks), Go! (run in place). Low crawl! Beat your boots, "Front!... Back!… Go!" Lay on your back and hold your feet six inches off the ground "six inches!"  
Great beads of sweat like rain on a windshield accumulated and ran down my face stinging my eyes, and down my back. My clothes clung to my skin like a drier sheet. I longed for my canteen, not more than 20 feet away.  
If only I could get some water, I felt like I could be reborn and gain a second wind. Suddenly I remembered what CPT V had said. "If you need water, get it, otherwise, there is no reason for you to be doing anything other than exactly what I tell you to do." That was it, my ticket to get a water break. I contemplated it through a few more flutter-kicks.  
Then I couldn't stand it any longer. He had clearly said, "if you need water, get it," and I needed water. I was going for it. I stood up bravely and moved with purpose in a straight line to my water source.  
"What are you doing?" CPT V snapped  
"You said we could get water if we needed it." I replied hoping I could remind him of his statement that would make this ok.  
"I know what I said. I'm not asking what I said, Lieutenant. I'm asking what you are doing."  
This was already not going well "I'm getting water," I sounded back and kept moving  
"Getting water?" he questioned in an upset tone.  
"Yes." I replied. I was committed.  
"Yes, what?"  
"Yes, Getting water" I said now less confident in what I was doing.  
"How about, Yes Sir, Getting water, Sir."  
"Yes Sir, Getting Water, Sir!" I sounded back quick, loud, and crisp. Crap, I suddenly understood his tone. I might have gotten away with this if I had simply answered the question asked and said "Sir". I was especially mad at myself now for getting singled out. I grabbed my canteen and took a drink. It was cool, but not as refreshing as I had imagined. I was anxious to get back and blend in with the misery of everyone else. I sensed that wasn't going to happen.  
"You like water, Sparrow?" CPT V asked loud and smug as I screwed on the lid and scrambled to get back to my place in formation.  
"Yes, Sir." I announced with outward confidence. Internally I knew this was not going to go well. Somehow I knew I was about to get proverbially water boarded. There was another Cadre there that day, Sergeant First Class Colman, who continued to drill the other Lieutenants. But his memory is merely a shadow as CPT V had zeroed in on me. This day was not going to go well.  
"How about you bring that five gallon water jug over here and hold it up in front of you as a reminder of how much you like water?" he grinned a devilish grin. "Yep, Lieutenant Sparrow luuuuves water." he stretched out the 'Luuuuves', "Anyone else like water?" no one dared make eye contact.  
The next five hours were a blur. At one point I do remember someone joined me in holding that water jug. We found that if we locked our arms together by holding each other's wrists, it was actually possible to hold it up without too much effort. We tried to look strained but CPT V realized to quickly that he was not inflicting nearly as much pain as he desired and we moved to other torturous inventions. (There's a team work, synergy lesson in there but it’s not the moral of this particular adventure)  
At noon the announcement was made, "Alright, you have exactly one hour to get something to eat and rest before the fun begins again. If you don't want to do this anymore, just don't come back and enjoy the rest of your Saturday. For the rest of you masochists, I will see you back here in one hour."  
Several people just didn't come back. Me, I came too far not to be committed. "Here we go," I thought as CPT V approached again. "If you came back you are in the running." He announced to our shock. "Put your name on this list. Good work. Get a shower. We will see you Monday." Fortunately for us, the test was over for the day. But there would be plenty of others. (There’s a ”don’t give up your closer than you think” lesson in here as well, but that’s also not the moral of this tale)  
"We step off at zero four tomorrow morning. Not arrive a four. Not put your pack on at four. We step off at four. Anyone not there is automatically removed from the list." I set 3 alarms and told a buddy to check on me to make sure I was up and ready. We met in the hall on our way out. "You ready, Sparrow?" "Ready as I'm gonna get." I tried to sound motivated as we stepped out into the cool morning. You couldn't really call it morning; It was in the 3's, this was the middle of the night.  
It was uncomfortably cool now but once we got started we couldn't ask for better weather. It would be a 12 mile ruck march. The standard in the Army is less than 3 hours, but this was not just a race against the clock, it was a race against the other competitors. I had checked my pack at least ten times, paranoid that I would cross the finish line only to be disqualified for missing some insignificant item at the pack check following the race. "There will be no helping, pushing, or pulling other Lieutenants along. I don't even want to see you talking to anyone. Is everyone clear?" everyone nodded "Are there any questions?" If there were no one was awake enough to ask.  
"30 seconds" I checked my watch, 0359:30. He wasn't kidding. "Ready…" 5 seconds on my watch, "Go!" We stepped off across the asphalt parking lot but were soon on a dirt road. There are a number of strategies for this type of event. Some simply speed walk for 12 miles. Not only is that much slower for me, to walk fast for that long is killer on my calves and shins. Others adopt an alternating run for a set time, then walk for a set time, approach. For me the first mile is critical. It sets the tone for the event. It is almost always my goal to jog the first mile, unless it's all uphill and impractical to do so. Beyond that, as a general rule, I run the downhill and walk the uphill. The flat is the most challenging for me. I can't keep up running the entire time. If there are landmarks, such as telephone poles, I adopt a common strategy of running the distance between a set of poles then walking the next distance between the next set of landmarks and repeating.  
The dirt road ran mostly downhill from the start. One mile passed. I felt good as I stretched into a walking stride and looked behind me for the first time. Maybe a handful of people were ahead of me. Two more came up behind me as I slowed to walk for a moment. I started to jog again and passed them. We continued to leapfrog each other for nearly half a mile as they alternated between running past me and slowing to walk as I jogged past them, until a long downhill stretch for the next mile put me significantly out in the lead. The course turned right onto a hardball road and flattened out. I kept relatively motivated for the next couple miles one pole at a time, jogging and then walking until the road turned right again and I began a steady climb that I could hardly walk up, let alone run. The next mile was the toughest in the race. Climbing so vertically at times that I felt like I could reach out my hand and touch the road in front of me. I just kept putting one foot in front of the other. The road wound upwards and I could see I was steadily gaining on someone. Then he stopped all together and looked as though he might fall over backwards.  
"You ok, Johnson." I spoke almost in a whisper as I passed.  
"I can't move forward." In his eye's I could feel his panic.  
"Just keep putting one foot in from of the other" I tried to encourage, a little paranoid CPT V would step out and tell me I was disqualified for somehow aiding someone. He never made it any farther. Despite a great start, Johnson was eventually picked up by the cleanup van, with the top of the hill literally around the next bend.  
The course beyond the hill seamed to go on forever. My feet hurt. I could feel my toes slamming into the fronts of my boots. I could feel the heat of friction as blisters formed on the pads of my feet. I didn't dare stop. The more it hurt, the harder I pushed, trying to end it as quickly as I could. I crossed the finish line with no fanfare. I'm not sure how many crossed before me. At some point it wasn't about them anymore. It was about me beating me. Overcoming the urge to stop, take off my boots, and rest. I had done my best and I was proud of that.  
The toenails on both of my big toes went black. One fell off. I couldn't stand to wait and see if the other would meet the same fate, so I didn't wait, I ripped it out. It was painful, but they grew back. Blisters healed. Runs never felt easier but they got longer and faster. Five months of rigorous training later I was in the best shape of my life. Finally, Cadre posted the long awaited order-of-merit list. There I was, number four! I continued to be surprised at the confidence others put in my abilities. The two dive school slots were quickly snagged by the top two lieutenants. The third, Lieutenant, Tool, chose Ranger School. Those were awesome training opportunities, as were Airborne and Air Assault school (jumping from air planes and rappelling from helicopters) but I did not hesitate, I wanted Sapper Leader Course. I was already at Fort Leonard Wood. I already had a school seat. I was already trained and ready. All I needed were orders to keep me there. But orders never came. Had I better understood the process, had I known the right people to talk to, had I ensured the administrative things were in place, had I learned better from my own previous lesson to be a bold advocate for myself, I could be wearing the prestigious red tab with all capital, white block letters that reads "SAPPER". Instead I went home, my head down, discouraged and disappointed. Adding insult to injury, my parents later told me they had planned to attend my Sapper School graduation. Other than my commissioning, they had not attended any of my Army milestones of promotions or training graduations. I wanted desperately to please them and have them be a part of my life. I shared some of the highlights of my preparation in hopes to express a glimpse of the effort exerted only to come up short. 15 years later, now too old and broken to make it possible, I still covet that red SAPPER tab. I was devastated. Worse, I had no plan. I felt the familiar emptiness I felt coming home from a mission. After five months of focus, I struggled with the transition. I sulked around for the next few months feeling sorry for myself. I didn't get a job, I didn't really even look very hard. Over the previous five months I had made more than I had made in my entire life combined, to that point. I didn't want some lame job. I had a degree. I couldn't slave for pennies. Besides, I would deploy in a few months and a regular job is not what I was looking for. Faced with an exacerbated wife and mounting bills, I finally signed up to substitute teach in the local school district. It was insult to previous injury, but it was somewhat flexible, more importantly, I had a house payment to make, with three kids to feed and sorrow wasn't putting food on the table.  
Have a plan, Have a contingency plan. Especially for the transitions. I have a good friend with a doctorate degree in elementary education. PhD, is not sufficient to describe her skill with holding the attention of rambunctious kindergarteners or adults. The secret, she taught me, is in the transitions. That space between one activity and the next, is critical. She is a transition ninja. Unfortunately at that time in my life, I was not. I swore I would not be left without a transition plan again. It has made me more successful and given me greater peace of mind.