**Week 46 - Dec 02: Attitude**  
_Theme: Parenting & Stoicism_  
[Chapter Twelve: Part 2]  
As a new father, I thought that I just had to figure out the trick to parenting. I imagined that once I knew the secret I could just put that on repeat until they turned 18 and moved out and I would be good to go. I mean, humans have been parenting children for thousands of years. Surely somebody figured it out by now, I just had to find the magic “three step process”. Unfortunately that’s not a thing. Whenever there are humans involved there are variables and the goal posts keep moving.  
Industries change, rewards change, what motivates people changes, over time the world changes. If you’re not learning and adapting with it, you are not leading. Leaders have to anticipate and it is impossible to anticipate without continuing to study work at it and learn  
A doctor who leaves medical school thinking they know everything there is to know about medicine is sadly mistaken. That doctor can’t even know all that is currently known about medicine, Let alone everything that will be discovered about medicine in the future. that person may be able to practice for a time but will eventually fall behind and fail in their profession.  
Same for leaders, keep learning and keep working at it. Effort is recognized.  
There are things I’ve learned in life that took me a lifetime to understand. What I didn’t know I was learning in preschool was to enjoy life. The learning and working hard comes easier when we are enjoying ourselves. If it’s drudgery then you are not understanding the purpose of the task or you are not finding that spoon full of sugar. There are countless books on positive attitude. It seems the world is all on Prozac, some people need to get it. Others just need to get off their behinds and enjoy life. If you are in a profession you do not enjoy, maybe you should look for the exit. Money means a lot, but it is not everything. Career is a lot, but failing at home is a hefty price to pay for a successful career and leaves some wealthy and empty. Balance life. As a leader it is important that your employees are able to balance their lives too. Don’t forget the individuals that make up your teams, if they are not happy they are harder to lead.  
“The longer I live, the more I realize the impact of attitude on life. Attitude, to me, is more important than facts. It is more important than the past, than education, than money, than circumstances, than failures, than successes, than what other people think or say or do. It is more important than appearance, giftedness or skill. It will mak3e or break a company...a church....a home. The remarkable thing is, we have a choice every day regarding the attitude we will embrace for that day. We cannot change our past...we cannot change the fact that people 4will act in a certain way. We cannot change the inevitable. The only thing we can do is play on the one string we have, and that is our attitude...I am convinced that life is 10% what happens to me and 90% how I react to it. And so it is with you...we are 5in charge of our attitudes.”  
― Charles R. Swindoll