**Week 45 - Nov 25: The Volleyball Net**  
_Theme: THANKSGIVING. Victory/Peace in Ramadi._  
[Chapter Twelve: Don’t Forget to Enjoy It and Leave a Legacy]  
I served as a route clearance platoon leader in Ramadi, Iraq from 2006-2007. I couldn’t wear a memorial bracelets for all the people I cared about who we lost because my arm and my heart wouldn’t take it. We got hit by so many IEDs I lost count. But, I will never forget when we drove into downtown Ramadi after we had finally cleared the last of the insurgency out of the city. As the lead vehicle rounded a corner out of my sight and faced up the street designated to be cleared, the vehicle commander radioed back to me in confusion and concern. “6,1, they’ve got a volleyball net blocking the road up here." He paused, then asked "What should we do?” He was as serious as I had ever heard him. It was a hilarious question from a guy who fought to be aggressive and not be risk averse, who insisted we put gunners out in the turrets where they could engage the enemy, who had been on the ground and in culverts to find IEDs, who would rush though a hail storm of gunfire to the aid of his comrades The same SSG Hale who said "let me do my job and find IEDs" and "If you don't trust me fire me." It highlights the absurdity of the situation, but mostly, it highlights the depth of our engagement with the enemy, previously any road block or intentional delay had been a set up for an ambush, on this day there would be no ambush, it was people genuinely enjoying themselves. It highlights for me the drastic change we helped propagate and the privileges that was ours to witness victory.  
I called back “1, can you ask them to please move it, over.” “They’re moving it 6, we’ll be moving in a minute.” A few minutes later he came back over the radio. “6, we’re not gonna’ to find any IEDs. There are people everywhere.” I had heard that Ramadi was a city of 200,000 people but I hadn’t seen very many of them. Those that I did see were usually eliminated as a threat. Now droves of people were everywhere, smiling and waving and we were right in the middle of a big parade. In that moment some of the sacrifice seemed validated, at least in some small way for me.