==1st BDE 3rd IN DIV conducted Operation Lug Wrench nearly a year previous in order to substantiate the reports but returned having found little nothing. 1st BDE 3rd IN DIV conducted Operation Lug Wrench nearly a year previous in order to substantiate the reports but returned having found little nothing.==
 
==He had attended the advanced search course and indicated that the small caches were likely distribution points and that a larger cache likely existed nearby.==
 
By far the largest cache contained inside the structure were drawings on the walls of us military convoys being attacked with IEDs. A vehicle on the sight contained explosives small caches of munitions were discovered in the surrounding area. All hands either provided security, searched for the munitions or carried projectiles and improvised containers to where they would be disposed of. SFC Hartman carried a projectile that unknown to him or anyone else at the time contained a mustard agent. The Explosive ordnance disposal team detonated the explosives leaving little trace of the munitions. As soon as the disposal was confirmed the BN Commander ordered a hasty ex-fill from the area. Our tired group returned to camp Ramadi, refueled the vehicles and went to eat at the chow hall. SFC Hartman indicated to me that his arm felt like it was burning. He showed me his red arm which appeared to have a sunburn. He went to the medical facility and they diagnosed it as a sunburn and gave him some cream. I was exhausted and took a nap. SFC Hartman attempted to do the same but the pain in his arm was too great and he went back to C Med. By this time it was beginning to swell with small blisters. The doctor told him it must be a bad rash from something he was exposed to and gave him some other cream. I saw his arm a short time later when he showed it to the company medic who immediately said it looked like muster agent. And escorted him straight back to C Med. Within the hour he was on a bird flying out for treatment. He would spend months at the burn facility at BAMC in San Antonio, TX. He received a skin graft and the doctors confirmed that he had been exposed to a mustered agent.