**Chapter Eight: The team needs a clear task, purpose, and end state**   Every day in Ramadi the schedule went something like this: I would get up about noon, get dressed, go out to my truck, which my awesome platoon always had ready, do a radio check, then move out Ogden gate and into the City of Ramadi. We turned left out the gate, crossed the Euphrates river, and then at check point 294, made a left into Hurricane Point, the Marine base. Once inside we parked our vehicles. Myself, my platoon sergeant, and squad leaders, walked into the former palace of Ude Husain for our ConOP (Concept of Operation) brief. I sat at the big boy table with the JTAC “Jr.”, EOD (Explosive Ordnance Disposal), Gunnery Sergeant Bratcher, and the other Marines. The brief was similar every day. Usually Captain Mahar, commander of Weapons Company, a great Marine and a true professional (Go Army, Beat Navy) would brief, although the 1-6 Mar Battalion Operations Officer took the helm when the mission was at the BN level and the BN Commander, LTC Journy, was almost always present - a great commander and a great leader. After the brief we loaded the trucks and moved back to Camp Ramadi where I would brief my platoon on our part in the mission. Initially I planned the brief alone. When I briefed the plan there were always lots of questions. “Why are we doing it that way? Why don’t we do it this way?” Usually their ideas were better than the plan I identified and so I would take their suggestions. It would take time to hear the explanation of the alternate plan. Then more time to explain that the plan I just briefed was not the plan but, in fact, the new plan was the plan. Briefing this way made me seem week and unknowledgeable as a leader, it wasted people’s time, and worst of all, it caused confusion. What was the actual plan? One simple thing fixed all that. After the trip to HP, I would meet with my squad leaders for 15 to 30 minutes to go over with them the way I saw the mission happening. They would bring up questions and suggestions. Then when we went to the brief we came as a unified front with the best possible plan, taking into account each group’s piece in the mission. Once in a while suggestions were made by other members of the platoon. I welcomed them as it helped us all ensure we understood fully the plan and made sure we had the best plan possible. Most of those questions would already have been addressed in my leadership meeting and could be explained quickly. The united front for the plan made us all, as leaders, understand and buy into the plan. That ensured no insubordination, and maximum participation.  
==Holding meetings, for meeting sake, is a waist of time, but having regularly scheduled touch points (yes, a fancy phase to disguise that it’s just a meeting) for productive collaboration is useful. Engineers and Artillery use the phase ”level the bubbles” to refer to getting everyone ”on the same page”==  
In 2007 improvised explosive devises (IED) plagued Ramadi, Iraq. In the months before, route clearance teams found and removed hundreds of IEDs and many others detonated on coalition forces and civilians. Intelligence reports indicated that insurgents smuggled in munitions for the IEDs and stored them in caches north of the Ramadi in vicinity of the ==Thar Tha==r Dam. Due to the volume of IEDs and the continued reports of the caches 1st Brigade, 3rd Infantry Division launched Operation Lug Wrench II. 2nd Platoon, B Company, Task Force 321 Engineers, received the mission to clear a route for the infantry infill. The infantry unit received the mission to search for the caches.  
As a young Lieutenant I always found great joy and felt great importance attending the combined arms rehearsals for major exercises. It felt cool to be the one to stand on a giant map of the operational area and move the pieces around the battle space. This Battalion was doing everything right and I was a part of it, except, something was not quite right to me, and I couldn't figure out what. The operations officer briefed that five days were planned for the mission. Then almost immediately the Commander added a caveat that we might find nothing and the mission could be over in a day. At that remark several people in the room looked at each other and it was suddenly clear that from the leader on down, despite going through all the right motions, no one believed this was anything more than a waste of time. A single infantry platoon out of the entire battalion was designated to search for caches at three specific grid locations.  
Following the rehearsal I tracked down the leader of that platoon to see if there was anything we could do to assist them. We had extensive search experience and we were always eager to share what we could. He looked at me with the eyes of a teenager whose younger brother had just asked "can I help?" I asked questions about how the searches would be conducted and what equipment would be used. They had no equipment, no mine detectors, no training. He too, was skeptical of their mission. He expected to find nothing and return promptly that day or if necessary early the following day. He doubted the existence of the caches at all, and why wouldn't he? He was following the lead of his leaders.  
I walked out, head down, somewhat from discouragement at the lack of seriousness about the mission and in part because I was studying the notes I had made and devising a strategy for how we could make it better.  
"Hey, Second Lieutenant?" I looked up to see who called me by my full rank. I assumed it must be someone who thought themself important and was trying to demean my rank. "Are you the Platoon Commander for the Route Clearance team?" It wasn't that at all, it was a Marine Corps Captain. (Marines are accustomed to calling each other by their full rank.) "Yes." I answered puzzled. "Lightning from the sky" He sounded off. I guessed that meant he was happy to talk to me. "What can I do for you, Sir." I replied. "I'm from the ANGLICO (Air Naval Gunfire Liaison Company) for Lug Wrench, I'm looking for a place to ride for the operation and was told you might have space." Typical. We frequently had "ride alongs" on my patrols. The Buffalo was one of the safest vehicles to be in and with big windows and a high platform, it gave a great vantage point. So many people tried to ride with us that our Ops Sergeant put a "CAB rides" sign up on the door of our command post. "CAB Rides: Ride with 2B and get your CAB or your money back." CAB being short for Combat Action Badge. A badge received for direct engagement with the enemy. We were in constant contact through small arms fire, rockets, and IEDs. Far too often requests to ride with us were weak excuses to get fancy badges, a prospect we didn't appreciate one bit. It was meant to be a joke, but I didn't think it was funny at all, and repeatedly tore down the sign in disgust.  
"So can I count on you for a seat?" He asked directly "Sure, I guess." I didn't have a good reason why not.  
I returned from the combined arms rehearsal to brief my Platoon Sergeant and Squad Leaders. Immediately they detected my concern. We all concurred that we could not miss the opportunity to truly curb the flow of munitions into the city. If they wouldn't find the caches we would. SFC Hartman procured additional mine detectors from other platoons. Soldiers performed preventative checks and services on all equipment, and rehearsed searching techniques. We were ready.  
Somewhere around 2:00am, 2nd platoon left Trooper Gate of Camp Ramadi and headed East on route Mobil with two buffalos, two huskies - one towing a red pack (replacement parts) - three RG 31s, an EOD Cougar filled with explosives, a HMMT wrecker, and a fuel tanker. Our 10 vehicle convoy plus trailers made a number of wrong turns in route to the link up location in the middle of the dessert North of Ramadi. At one point we attempted to exit the highway only to run into an Iraqi Army security station with no exit and had to back up a quarter of a mile around a curve with steep banks on either side. (A quick shout out to those drivers who followed a leader only to be redirected.)  
At 0300 we finally arrived, somehow right on time, to our link up point, in what I considered to truly be nowhere. I did not see the company we were to link up with and exited my vehicle to look around. The night was clear and pleasant. I looked around and saw only dirt. I climbed a dirt berm to get a better vantage point from which I hoped to see Chaos Company. To my surprise, directly on the other side of the berm sat an entire company of M1A1 Abrams tanks nestle close together and anticipating our arrival. A soldier directed me to his commander. I spoke with “Chaos 6” briefly and he instructed me that we would begin movement in one hour, at 0400.  
As dawn approached we moved North toward Thar Thar. Out my window I could see Blue platoon consisting of 4 tanks echeloned out across the desert to the East. With Red platoon echeloned to our West in the same fashion. We formed a spear with my platoon at the tip followed by a long convoy of two infantry companies in our trace. It was an awesome force and I was at the front and center.  
"Do you want Air Support?" The ANGLICO riding next to me in the buffalo asked. "What?" I almost forgot he was there. "Air support. I can get Apaches to provide cover from the sky." I understood the question and I understood what it meant. I just didn't know I could just get it by asking. "So, what is it you do?" I asked. I guess I should have understood his capability sooner, but when he had told me he could coordinate with air support the reaction in my mind was, "Yeah, I have a radio and can talk to other units too." I hadn't understand. "Of Course I want air support!"  
As the sun crested over the dessert horizon I could hear the distinct sound of rotors beating the sky growing louder from the South. "Where do you want them?" "What?" "What do you want them to do?" Again I had understood the question, I just didn't know I was calling the shots. Before I could process fully how to utilize them the pilot of one of the Apaches came up on my net.  
"Wolf 2-6, Joker 1-2 checking on station with two AH-60D Longbows, total of 2000 rounds of 30mm chain gun, 40each 70mm rocket pods, 8 hellfire missiles, and 1.5 hours of flight time. Requesting task and purpose, over."  
I tried to sound like I knew what I was doing.  
"Joker 1-2, Wolf 2-6, Task, check the route from here to the Thar Thar Dam. Purpose, identify suspected IED locations, suspicious personnel, or anything else out of the ordinary and report back, over."  
"Wolf 2-6, Joker 2-1 Roger, Task, clear North of the formation along this route and 50 meter to the shoulders from here to the Thar Thar Dam, Purpose, identify any obstacles, suspected IEDs, and any suspicious activity, over."  
"Solid Joker"  
He sounded so much cooler than I did.  
They pushed out to the West and made one big circle around us.  
Then up the road to the North out of sight. They were back in fairly short order. With their report and a request for a new task an purpose. I guess you can move pretty fast when not hindered by the ground.  
"Wolf 2-6 this is Chaos Red 1" "Go ahead Chaos Red 1" "Hey do you have contact with the Apaches? Over." "Affirmative, over." "Can you have them give us a heads up of any canalizing terrain they see out ahead? Over" "Will do, over" "TM, (thanks much) we will maintain our current formation unless you need us somewhere else. Just let us know where you need us." Did he just say to me “Just let us know where you need us?” I questioned myself.  
East and out my window I watched two Apaches hovering low over a platoon of tanks with the sun cresting the horizon as a back drop. It was an awesome sight and felt pretty darn important directing the action.  
Joker saw nothing significant until right on the Dam which they reported to be blocked completely with truck loads of dirt. Arrival on the sight confirmed the road impassable. The BN commander requested a sweep of the dam for booby traps, giving my platoon the first opportunity to get on the ground with mine detectors. Searchers found nothing significant and an 88 was brought forward to clear the dirt and create a path. Infantry Soldiers wasted no time and began searching the area. They found nothing of consequence and continued moving. With the road passable, we cleared past the dam and around the first bend in the road heading Southeast.  
A member of my team excitedly reported that they spotted a small cache of projectiles in a large culvert under the road. While recovering the ordnance, another team member discovered another small cache in a culvert further down the road. As the Explosive ordnance disposal team prepared to blow the ordnance in place I received a call on the radio from SGT Young. He requested permission to search a small cinderblock structure approximately 200 meters away from the road. I gave him the green light and just as he suspected the booby trapped building contained munitions. Within a few minutes of the report the Battalion Command Sergeant Major showed up on sight. He wanted to know what we had found, and where, and why it wasn't found by his two companies worth of infantry Soldier who swept through that area ahead of us. I could only point to our training and experience which was part of it but thoroughness and care for the mission also played a huge role in my mind. The munitions were reduced with no injuries thanks to quick thinking, good use of training knowledge, and a willingness to listen to the experts.  
"Shouldn't we destroy the shack so it can't be used for future caches?" someone suggested. At that the Apache pilots were eager to do more that just fly around. Can the Apaches hit it with their 30 mm link -less chain gun? Asked the ANGLICO "Absolutely!" I wasn't going to say ”no” to that. "Just let me know if we need to back away at all" "No your good right there." A few passes were fun to watch but mostly just put holes in the block. "Can we hit it with our 70 mm rockets" "YES!" I agreed emphatically. Still shocked that everyone was asking me for direction.They circled around and flew in low then pulled off and circled around again. It was the most fun I had had in a long time. We watched high explosive rounds burst all around. As the dust cleared they had done some damage, and while it was neat, the building was still standing. "Wolf 2-6, Red 4." "Whatcha got Red 4?" "Hey that was cool and all, but can we take a crack at it." My eyes lit up as I imagined a 120mm smooth boar ripping a gigantic hole in the side of the building. While I didn't think that would do any more than what we had just witnessed, as long as they were asking me, the answer was always "Yes". The M1A1 approached the building stopping just a few feet from it. What ever munition they hit it with was about to be at point blank range and that round would certainly travel out of sight before it stopped. Then unexpectedly the turret spun 180 degrees to the back. What are they doing? I wondered. It was like a motor cycle rider turning his hat backwards about to go fast. The engine whined and lurched like a horse team chomping at the bit, held back, ready to charge. The tank jumped out of the starting blocks. The engine screamed as it unleashed and smashed through the structure reducing the whole thing to rubble in one pass. He drove back and forth over the spot a few time for good measure and it was awesome!  
For the rest of the day 2nd Platoon B Company uncovered cashes of ordinance, bomb making materials, AK47s, and other weapons. The Apaches pilots and tankers joined the search pointing out potential search locations. As night fell and it began to be dark, my platoon found a large cache and what appeared to be a bunker complex. SFC Hartman called it up to the Commander who quickly arrived on sight with his PSD (Personal Security Detail). "Stop finding things, Lieutenant!" he reprimanded. I smiled broadly. He scowled more deliberately. He was serious. "We have to sleep at some point" he chastised. Still, for me, it was one of the best complements I ever received. We had already exhausted what we brought for demolition to destroy munitions. A resupply mission had to be organized to get more explosives from Camp Ramadi.  
My guys were anxious to search their findings but it would have too wait until daylight. We circled the wagons. The team started talking about a rest and security plan. I reminded them that none of us had optics as good as the tanks, who could see a threat a mile away, literally. We left one guy awake to monitor the radios and I slept uncomfortably but peacefully surrounded by a whole company of tanks.  
By day three the BN commander was impatient. Despite finding more than a dozen caches, he ordered "You have to move faster." Maybe they hadn't prepared to be out there that long. Even though the mission was scheduled for five days. Whatever the reason they were antsy to get back.  
"Guidons, guidons" That was the call I used to indicate I was talking to everyone. (I understood later that it specifically refers to flagged units, or companies with guidons, but I didn't really understand that and used it incorrectly but effectively.) "Listen, we need to speed up our search, so be deliberate but we need to pick up our pace." "6,3" the call came back nearly immediately, "3,6" "to be clear, do you want us to conduct a deliberate or a hasty search?" In my call back I attempted to clarify. "3,6 we need to hastily conduct a deliberate search, over" There was silence on the radio as SSG Heddlesten gathered his composure to professionally let me know that what I just sad made no sense. "Sir, we can conduct a hasty search or a deliberate search. They are doctrinally two distinct search techniques. We will do what ever you direct but we can't do both at the same time, over." He was right I wanted it both ways but that was not possible and my lack of clear guidance wasn't helpful.  
I thought hard for a second. I was just directed to speed up our search. On the other hand, that direction came from the same commander who didn't expect to find anything and told me to stop finding stuff. "Guidons, correction take as much time as it takes, over." "6,3, Acknowledged, deliberate search, over"
 
==Insuring your subordinates understand the purpose of the task can be just as important, or sometimes more important that understanding the task itself. Harkening back to my keyboard class in the seventh grade, I completed the task of filling the page with the correct letters and sentences. In fact, I completed the task more efficiently than the other students, but without understanding the intent of the task I failed to learn how to type effectively and thus failed the mission. The opposite can be just as true. It is my opinion that the term micro-manage is over used to mean anything mismanaged or unmanaged. When I talk about micro managing I’m describing telling people HOW something is to be done and not what and why is to be done. In so doing we stifle creativity and worst of all we discourage smart people from finding solutions that are more efficient, cost effecting, time saving, resource saving, and potentially a better outcome than what we imagined. But that is not the same as being clear about what is to be done.==  
==Basic leadership starts with 1) a task, 2) a purpose, or reason for the task 3) an end state (in other words an explanation about how to know when the task is complete) and 4)a time line==  
==Another way to say it similarly is Task, condition, standard==  
==I also must reiterate here the importance of the last lesson, If you’re the leader, you gotta make decisions! You probably noticed that I am a collaborative leader. Collaboration, information, direction from your boss, are all important but ultimately you have to decide. Once you decide, you own the decision. I see this as one of the toughest things for young leaders to learn. Yes, you want want buy in. Yes, consensus is ideal. But even if everyone agrees with the choice, you can never blame anyone else for the outcome. You, made the choice. This is true in your personal life as well. Stop blaming your parents, your spouse, your work. Decide, and own it.==  
==Krier==  
"6,3 hold up" "Roger 3, all stop" The call came from the security vehicle, the last in the column, as we made our way Southeast across a wide expanse of dessert on all sides. We had left the aqua blue lake at Thar Thar with a few buildings huddled close to the precious source of water and followed south along a big cannel for a few miles. Now we could really only see dirt on every side. Had they spotted someone suspicious through their optics. Maybe, but the Abrams tanks, echeloned far out across the expanse, had far better optics than anything we had. The radio was quiet for a while. I was curious, as was everyone, about why we were stopping. I resisted the temptation to ask, knowing from experience that asking questions at this point would only frustrate those working to solve some challenge and delay the most accurate report. Maybe they had a problem with their truck. Maybe they just wanted to see how long I would last without getting curious and asking. That sounded like something they might try. It could be a thousand things. I could wait. I had a rule, anyone could stop the patrol, at any time, for any reason. Route clearance is dangerous and you should never assume that the truck in front of you would have seen what you see. In other words, if you see something, say something. I would also say, we’re not in a hurry, we have the rest of our lives to find it. The rear truck rarely halted us and I was happy to accommodate when they did. It seemed like an eternity, although it was probably close to 30 seconds, when they called back again. "6,3" 3,6" "6 we have some dirt back here that my gunner says doesn’t look right, over" "The dirt doesn't look right? Over" That's what we stopped for, dirt? That's all there was out here, dirt and more dirt. "Roger, he says the dirt doesn’t look right, break, request permission to check it out, over" "Roger, do you want the buffalo back there? over" "No 6, we are just going to hit it with the mine detectors. 3‘s on the deck." For the next two hours SGT Krier's team extracted dozens of munitions from an inconspicuous pile of dirt on the side of the road. SGT Krier, who in his regular life, when not in his superhero Army uniform, was a mild mannered equipment operator and self proclaimed dirt mover, was as expert as they come in piles of dirt. An entire Platoon of seasoned professionals at finding munitions had one by one slowly passed by that benign pile of dirt among a great expanse of piles and piles of dessert dirt. But SGT Krier had seen something more than dirt. It's impossible to know for certain how many Improvise Explosive devices would have come from that pile of dirt or how many lives he potentially saved that day.  
==Speak up about what you know==  
==Listen to those who speak up.==  
==Chances are the people you lead are a lot smarter and more proficient at their tasks than you are.==