**PHASE 10: LEGACY (Homecoming)**  
**Week 41 - Oct 28: The Ghost Truck**  
_Theme: Sleep Deprivation & Bad Metrics_  
[Chapter Ten: Do What's Important]  
We went on like this for 45 days straight. Days blended together in a dusty desert haze. We left in the dark, then come back in the dark. Had the sun showed her face in the meantime? It would take unavailable effort to remember. We sleep for a few hours and woke in the darkness. The sun came up. We went out in the day only to come back the next day; a night snuck passed while we patrolled. I didn’t know how many days passed or how many missions we completed. Four hours of sleep, twelve hour mission, six hours of sleep, 16 hour mission. On and on; 48 missions in 45 days. We "slept" in old crowded tents surrounded by high cement barriers. We revered those walls for standing tall and guarding from the frequent mortars seeking to destroy us as we slept in the far corner of the crowded operating base. The surge in full swing, we resided as permanent transients. Actually all of the fighters were transients, only that some moved on sooner than others. Nothing but exhaustion could overcome the stagnant July Iraq heat to induce sleep in the less than air conditioned canvass tent. The tent itself, a savior from the relentless beating sun of the day, became a suffocating plastic bag at night.  
After a particularly long mission, I sat down to fill out my reports as the sun burned out on the horizon. During that period I reported to somewhere in the neighborhood of six bosses. We did missions under direct operational control of the 1-30 Infantry and fell directly under the Battalion, but for ease of command and control, the engineer company commander took us under his wing, both the BN and the CO got my direct reports. We belonged administratively, at that time, to the 875th Engineer Battalion from the Arkansas National Guard, where we received support for major mechanical, logistics, and other issues. They resided on a different Forward Operating Base and again for ease of control, on their part, they placed one of their companies as an intermediary, although the BN received my reports directly as well. While outside the jurisdiction of our home unit in Ramadi, they still kept tabs on us, and required that we file reports for them, again both to the Company and Battalion. So I finalized my reports in sextuplicate.  
It had been a less than thrilling mission. The 1st of the 30th sent us to do more of a reconnaissance than clearance mission, to determine the ”trafficability” of a route for one of their companies into that company's sector. That day we followed familiar roads to a dirt road that passed near scattered farm houses. It stretched out narrow and unpaved, but certainly passable. We bumped along for a couple of miles with few turns as we headed deeper into dusty fields with nothing to report. Then abruptly the farm road ended. We could see tank tracks that crossed a ditch in front of us and disappeared across an open field. We searched for several minutes for a bypass but ditches in all directions made it impossible to go anywhere but back on the the road we came in on. We called up the impassability of the road to the tankers for whom we recon'ed. They swore that "of course it's traversable, we passed through there earlier." "That’s because you’re in a tank!" SSG Heddlesten reminded them. I thought him a little gruff for pointing out the obvious but the tanker on the other end of the radio seemed to realize for the first time that he could maneuver where other vehicles could not go.  
With a roadblock to any future success ahead of us we were turning around to return to base. Then, a gift from the fates to spice up our mission, one of our trucks, tired of working in the heat, just gave up and refused to start or go any farther. Fortunately we had learned to take care of ourselves and had pre-staged a wrecker at a nearby combat out post. We sent two trucks to escort it to us, recovered the vehicle, and returned to our hot tents, exhausted.  
My report reflected the traffic-ability of the route for wheeled vehicles to the ditch where we turned around and the possibility of maneuvering farther with tracked vehicles. The timeline of events included the time it took to escort the wrecker to our location, recover the vehicle and “ex-fill” the area. I went back to the tent and passed out on my cot without taking off my boots.  
I woke some time later to the sound of the radio in my ear. Maybe I dreamt it. It sounded again. I fumbled around, said something into the radio as a reply, and sat up. It was dark. I tried to remember what day it was. I looked at my watch but couldn’t comprehend what the numbers meant. I was wet. Was it raining? and salty. nope, just sweaty. I stumbled out into the night. The breeze gave me a slight chill from my wet shirt but it was a relief from the stifling heat in the tent. I wandered in the dark to the command post tent. Nothing looked familiar. I felt lost but my feet knew the way. As I entered the light blinded my sleeping eyes. I opened one eye and looked into the face of 2LT B. He was young, probably not old enough to drink. This was the surge and the country was deploying everyone breathing. 2LT B had barley finished school. He probably hadn't unpacked at his first duty station before they sent him straight to the fight after the unit was already on ground. He didn't have a real job yet, but learned the ropes as he served as the companies intelligence officer.  
“What’s up?” I asked as cheerfully as I could muster, and yawned. I exaggerated the yawn a little more than necessary to emphasize that I was not thrilled to be called in and that this had better be important. On my stumble over I had thought of all the reasons I would be called in. All of them pointed to a mission. It was just a matter of where and what time we would be asked to leave. Depending on how important the mission was, would determine how much I would protest the lack of maintenance for our vehicles and maintenance for my Soldiers by way of sleep. I braced for impact.  
"I need a grid for where your truck broke down" he said almost scolding.  
"What?" That's not what I expected and I had to process what he wanted. "You reported a truck breaking down but you didn't provide a location"  
"The truck isn't there" I tried to clarify. "We recovered it." Had I been so tired that I left that out? I briefly wondered.  
"But you still have to provide a grid for where it broke down" He stated mater-of-factly. "There's nothing there, at that spot" I stared at him It wasn't getting through. "Where the truck died, there's no bomb in the road, it didn't get shot or blown up," He continued to stare "The truck is in the motor pool, It's already fixed and running fine, it doesn’t even matter why it stopped working it's already working again." We continued to stare at each other "It didn't even get stuck" I continued to explain looking for any reason why he would need the location. "I could see if you wanted to tell someone 'hey there's a big mud hole right here don’t get stuck in it like the route clearance team did.' The only reason I reported it at all is because it explains why the mission took so long." I was talking almost to myself to convince myself that I had made a mistake "THERE'S NOTHING THERE" I blurted out "Why do you need a grid?" "So I can pass it to higher." "and what are they going to do with it?" "That's not for us to decide. We just provide them the information and they decide what to do with it." "I'll tell you what they are going to do with it." "What?" "NOTHING! Its not actionable in any way. Nobody cares about a truck that isn't there. You are just going to confuse people who will ask what is there. And you will say 'that's where the truck broke down' and they will ask 'where is the truck now' and you will say 'it's fixed' and they will ask 'so why are you reporting this?' and you will say nothing because it makes no sense." I turned to leave. "You're not going too give me a grid" he nearly whined "Nope" I didn't turn back around and kept walking ==“What are you the worst Lieutenant Ever?”==