From 2006 to 2007, I served as the Platoon Leader for 2nd Platoon B Company of the 321st Engineer Task Force, deployed to Ramadi, Iraq. Our mission was to move out ahead of Marine and Army infantry units to clear the way of improvised explosive devices. Our mission was dangerous. We had great equipment that could better withstand the frequent blasts, but near daily, our mission was delayed as vehicles were destroyed in blasts. With the people inside shaken but not deterred, we needed a way to recover the vehicle or make repairs quickly to continue the mission. So, we began to take a mechanic with us on every mission. The first guy we took was knowledgeable and prepared with tools and repair parts, but as soon as a vehicle was attacked and needed repairs, he cowered in the corner of his truck and refused to face the potential danger he had just witnessed. The next mechanic was gung-ho enthusiastic. At the first opportunity to use his expertise, he sprang from the vehicle, rifle at the ready, his security posture spot on. The only problem, I didn’t need him for security; I had much more trained and experienced Soldiers for that. I needed him to be a mechanic. He had limited tools and no spare parts. What could have been a simple fix led to a mission failure. My team then approached me about taking Specialist (SPC) Hill, arguably the best mechanic in the company. Only one obstacle, SPC Hill is a woman, and female Soldiers were not allowed in combat roles. SSG Heddlesten convinced me and I in turn convinced my company and battalion leadership that she was a Soldier first and a dang good mechanic. I argued that it was within her mission scope to support us on patrols. They had to agree.   
On March 19, 2007, hundreds of Marines and 500 Iraqi military and police waited on stand-by as 2nd Platoon B Company cleared a route into the final insurgent stronghold in the city of Ramadi. With the weight of the whole mission bearing down on us in the middle of interrogating an explosive device, insurgency members, shooting at our mechanical arm, shot a lucky hole in the hydraulic hose, rendering it nearly useless. “I can fix it.” SPC Hill declared. “You will be totally exposed. I have no way to cover you.” I protested. “I will be fast.” She replied with determination in her eyes. I agreed. In the middle of downtown Ramadi, with enemy fighters all around, with no way to cover her movement, SPC Hill climbed on top of the tallest vehicle, replaced a section of the hose, and refilled the hydraulic fluid. Within minutes, we were back in business.  
That night, we found 8 IEDs and a giant cache of munitions to make more. 44 Insurgents were detained. No friendly forces were injured by explosive devices.   
For her actions that day, the Marine Battalion Commander awarded SPC Hill the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal, on the spot when we pulled in the gate to the base. As he pinned the Marine Corps medal on a female Army Soldier, he said, “I don’t know how this will work, but we will figure it out in the paperwork later.” I am honored to have served alongside SPC Hill, an exceptional mechanic, engineer, and Soldier.