**9 - Mar 18 - Don't Shush the Shusher** _(Text: Chapter Three - Part 4)_  
The thing I struggled with the most at Basic was not the physical or mental challenges. I struggled most with people who could not follow directions. Too many times I recall sitting in an empty room after our drill sergeant gave specific instructions to “clean weapons and be quiet.” Whispering would start, which escalated to quite talking. Then shushing would follow, followed by the shushing of the shushers. Egos got in the way of reason, and arguments ignited over who should “shut up” and who couldn’t tell who to “shut up”. "Shhhhhh." "you shhhhh" ”I don't have to shhhhh.” ”You don't tell me what to do." The drill sergeant would return, make us all do push-ups, then leave with the same instructions as before, “clean weapons and be quiet”. As soon as he left, the fighting would commence again. “We wouldn’t get smoked if you would stop talking”. “You stop talking”. “Why don’t you both stop talking” a third party would chime in. “Why don’t you butt out”. "Why don't you shut up"… It was almost a relief when the drill sergeant would come in again and we would exercise until we couldn’t possibly move any part of our bodies anymore. Then he would leave and it would start all over again. Egos and selfishness sometimes overrule reason and sound judgment. **You cannot allow pride to affect your decisions.** If you do, you will inevitably make poor decisions. You also cannot have a culture of selfishness in a successful organization. Competition? Yes! But when people feel the need to save face despite negative consequences they make rash choices and tear teams apart. One person that never seemed to stop talking was Privet Simmons. With the last name “Sparrow”, I stood right behind PVT Simmons in every line. He would tell me all about his pearl-white Volkswagen Beatle with royal purple shag interior. He went on and on in such detail that I still remember 30 years later. He had participated in JROTC in high school and thought himself to be an expert of all things Army. I was constantly in trouble because Simmons was constantly turned around talking to me. Toward the end of Basic Combat Training, while conducting our field training exercise, the company sat on the outside of a bend in a dry river bed. On the opposite bank our company commander stood talking. The grassy slope curved around perfectly into a natural, miniature amphitheater. The raised bank on the other side made for a natural stage. This was the company’s new commander, not that I had seen the old commander more than once. He was giving some “Hooah” speech that I was less than interested in. - In the Army it is customary to say “Hooah” as a response. Some argue that “Hooah” is actually ”H-U-A”, and like most things in the Army, it is an acronym which stands for Heard Understood and Acknowledged. Whatever it means, it can be somewhat motivating at times but mostly becomes droning and mindless. This commander seemed to prefer "Check" as a replacement to the traditional "Hooah" and was saying “Check” after every sentence; to which we responded with “Check, Sir”. As I sat thinking more about saying “Check” verses “Hooah” than about what was being said, I got the sense that something wasn’t right. All was quiet, too quiet, and although I had heard my share of boring speeches in my life, this one seemed to be dragging out intentionally. He seemed to be stalling for something. I felt uneasy, and while the cool grass invited me to lounge on one elbow as the rest of the Soldiers did, I sat ridged looking around. As I observed, I noticed the drill sergeants in the back passing each other and shooting glances that said to me that something was definitely up but that they were trying to be discrete about it. I elbowed my battle buddy PVT Lennon and signaled to him that something was off, I’m not sure he understood but sat up as well. Then I heard it, a sharp pop followed by a loud hiss; the distinct sound of a CS canister. I reacted without thought. I opened my M40 protective mask case on my left hip with my left hand. I reached in with my right hand and grabbed it firmly. My chin went into the chin rest. My left hand came up to pull the straps tightly onto my head. With my right hand I cleared and sealed the mask. The Army standard to do this is nine seconds. It took me less than four. But now I was certain that I failed… and died. It was completely black and I wasn’t breathing. The first step to dawning the M40 protective mask is to close your eyes and hold your breath, which I was still doing. “Breath!” I told myself. I gasped a first breath. I was alive, but I was still confused by the darkness. “My eyes are closed,” I finally acknowledged to myself. I opened my eyes, but to my surprise it was still dark. Then I felt the distinct burn on the back of my neck where the CS gas began to react with the sweat on my skin. “My hood!” I suddenly realized, was still over the front of my mask. I pulled it over my head and looked out for the first time. I immediately looked to my left to where my battle buddy, PVT Lennon, had been sitting next to me. He looked at me in that same instant having situated his mask simultaneously with me. “Are you good” I asked, muffled through the mask, showing him a questioning thumbs-up. He returned the thumbs-up gesture and muffled through his mask “I’m good. Are you good?” “I’m good,” I said shaking my thumbs-up hand to emphasize. “Good.” He repeated shaking his thumbs-up as we stared at each other. Then slowly my focus shifted past my comrade to what was happening beyond him and all around us. It looked like children were let loose in a hen house and were trying to catch chickens. PVT Lennon and I seemed to be the only two people still sitting and not running around franticly. The scene reminded me of a clip from a cartoon. I watched as one Soldier disoriented, eyes blurred from the gas, and panicked, ran straight on into a large tree. He fell hard on his back, scrambled to his feet again, and ran off into the woods bouncing off trees like a pin ball and out of sight. I watched a female soldier throw the crutches she had hobbled around with and run into the woods in another direction. I watched two people literally run right into each other, both falling backwards and onto their back sides on the ground. “This is crazy,” I thought “It’s like a ridiculous play I’m watching.” Then, as if on queue, I saw PVT Simmons run in from stage right. He stopped center stage, right on the spot where the commander had stood speaking moments before. “Where did that guy go”, I wondered. Simmons was coughing and hacking. As he stood there he reached for and struggled with his mask. He tried to put it on but the effects of the gas had already overcome him. He looked as though he would throw up. Then the mask was on his face. But it was too late. I could see his face clearly, as he looked directly at me through the mask lenses in panic. His eyes grew wide. His body contracted. Then, vomit filled the lower half of his mask, up passed his nose. He couldn’t breathe. His body convulsed. I could see his eyes just over the slurry. They pleaded with me for help. There was nothing I could do but watch. His body trembled like a volcano rumbling before an eruption. His eyes grew wider and then, suddenly, disappeared as he vomited again filling the entire mask. He flopped and twitched and tore the mask from his face, gasping for breath; then finally breathing in deep, forcing gas into his already burning lungs. He bent over throwing up again and again. He tried to run. He stumbled a few steps, vomited, ran a few more, stopped briefly to bend over and vomit again. As he disappeared into the woods I imagined the burning of his face as the gas reacted to the wet mess that was all over him. I couldn’t dwell long. As I turned to my right I saw a drill sergeant approaching fast. I prepared myself for an encounter, seeing him coming towards me and not yet understanding why. Then it became crystal clear. In the panic and chaos Soldier’s gear was strung across the area. Helmets, masks, cases, weapons, and anything he could see, he was after it. I suddenly felt a need to protect it. I began grabbing everything I could get my hands on. PVT Lennon saw what was happening and quickly joined the race. The drill sergeant saw me, he saw what I was doing, and he began working faster. We moved towards each other both determined to get as much stuff as we could. Both with arms full, clinging to straps, scrambling. Then it looked as though we would reach the same last weapon at the same time. I reached out and grabbed it the instant before he did, but his hand was on it. I clung tightly determined to save whoever the owner was from certain destruction at the hand of the drill sergeant. He looked hard at me. Noting my determination he released it with a shove and moved on in search of treasure elsewhere. I couldn’t carry more stuff if I found it. I looked at Lennon who had also collected more than he could comfortably carry. The sun was setting and people were gathering back together. Many covered in vomit looked exhausted and glad the ordeal was finally over. Word got out that Sparrow and Lennon had collected a bunch of stuff. A line formed and many cheered and hugged us as they got their things back. One poor sole at the end of the line was devastated to learn that we did not have his weapon. Then he heard his weapon number being called out by the drill sergeant. He hung his head and slowly moved that direction, not wanting to face the consequences of leaving his weapon. I felt bad for those who faired so poorly through the ordeal. At the same time I couldn’t help but feel proud of the way my battle buddy and I had reacted. I saw Simons still wet from his own fluids. He looked drained. I felt bad for him too, but I couldn’t help but feel somewhat vindicated. I smiled, I knew I shouldn’t, but THAT was the funniest thing I had ever seen in real life. Basic training was almost at its end and Simmons didn't have many more opportunities to turn around and get us both in hot water but when he did, I had only to remind him of standing in the middle of that clearing and throwing up in his mask. “Remember that time?” He didn't want to talk about it. And that kept him quiet. **Lessons learned: 1-Learn your job to the point that it becomes second nature. Plan for the crisis so that when it comes you are prepared and even surprise yourself by how well you react. 2- Be vigilant. 3- Trust your gut about things that don’t seem right. 4- Help other people, even if you don’t have to. Helping others leads to mutual help. Call it Karma or whatever you want to call it. Helping others always returns good works to you. Karma works in the other way too. The deserving eventually get what they deserve.**