**Week 35 - Sep 16: The Tank Pirouette**  
_Theme: Overkill & Kinetic Energy_  
[Chapter Eight: Part 3]  
East and out my window I watched two Apaches hovering low over a platoon of tanks with the sun cresting the horizon as a back drop. It was an awesome sight and felt pretty darn important directing the action.  
Joker saw nothing significant until right on the Dam which they reported to be blocked completely with truck loads of dirt. Arrival on the sight confirmed the road impassable. The BN commander requested a sweep of the dam for booby traps, giving my platoon the first opportunity to get on the ground with mine detectors. Searchers found nothing significant and an 88 was brought forward to clear the dirt and create a path. Infantry Soldiers wasted no time and began searching the area. They found nothing of consequence and continued moving. With the road passable, we cleared past the dam and around the first bend in the road heading Southeast.  
A member of my team excitedly reported that they spotted a small cache of projectiles in a large culvert under the road. While recovering the ordnance, another team member discovered another small cache in a culvert further down the road. As the Explosive ordnance disposal team prepared to blow the ordnance in place I received a call on the radio from SGT Young. He requested permission to search a small cinderblock structure approximately 200 meters away from the road. I gave him the green light and just as he suspected the booby trapped building contained munitions. Within a few minutes of the report the Battalion Command Sergeant Major showed up on sight. He wanted to know what we had found, and where, and why it wasn't found by his two companies worth of infantry Soldier who swept through that area ahead of us. I could only point to our training and experience which was part of it but thoroughness and care for the mission also played a huge role in my mind. The munitions were reduced with no injuries thanks to quick thinking, good use of training knowledge, and a willingness to listen to the experts.  
"Shouldn't we destroy the shack so it can't be used for future caches?" someone suggested. At that the Apache pilots were eager to do more that just fly around. Can the Apaches hit it with their 30 mm link -less chain gun? Asked the ANGLICO "Absolutely!" I wasn't going to say ”no” to that. "Just let me know if we need to back away at all" "No your good right there." A few passes were fun to watch but mostly just put holes in the block. "Can we hit it with our 70 mm rockets" "YES!" I agreed emphatically. Still shocked that everyone was asking me for direction.They circled around and flew in low then pulled off and circled around again. It was the most fun I had had in a long time. We watched high explosive rounds burst all around. As the dust cleared they had done some damage, and while it was neat, the building was still standing. "Wolf 2-6, Red 4." "Whatcha got Red 4?" "Hey that was cool and all, but can we take a crack at it." My eyes lit up as I imagined a 120mm smooth boar ripping a gigantic hole in the side of the building. While I didn't think that would do any more than what we had just witnessed, as long as they were asking me, the answer was always "Yes". The M1A1 approached the building stopping just a few feet from it. What ever munition they hit it with was about to be at point blank range and that round would certainly travel out of sight before it stopped. Then unexpectedly the turret spun 180 degrees to the back. What are they doing? I wondered. It was like a motor cycle rider turning his hat backwards about to go fast. The engine whined and lurched like a horse team chomping at the bit, held back, ready to charge. The tank jumped out of the starting blocks. The engine screamed as it unleashed and smashed through the structure reducing the whole thing to rubble in one pass. He drove back and forth over the spot a few time for good measure and it was awesome!  
For the rest of the day 2nd Platoon B Company uncovered cashes of ordinance, bomb making materials, AK47s, and other weapons. The Apaches pilots and tankers joined the search pointing out potential search locations. As night fell and it began to be dark, my platoon found a large cache and what appeared to be a bunker complex. SFC Hartman called it up to the Commander who quickly arrived on sight with his PSD (Personal Security Detail). "Stop finding things, Lieutenant!" he reprimanded. I smiled broadly. He scowled more deliberately. He was serious. "We have to sleep at some point" he chastised. Still, for me, it was one of the best complements I ever received. We had already exhausted what we brought for demolition to destroy munitions. A resupply mission had to be organized to get more explosives from Camp Ramadi.  
My guys were anxious to search their findings but it would have too wait until daylight. We circled the wagons. The team started talking about a rest and security plan. I reminded them that none of us had optics as good as the tanks, who could see a threat a mile away, literally. We left one guy awake to monitor the radios and I slept uncomfortably but peacefully surrounded by a whole company of tanks.  
By day three the BN commander was impatient. Despite finding more than a dozen caches, he ordered "You have to move faster." Maybe they hadn't prepared to be out there that long. Even though the mission was scheduled for five days. Whatever the reason they were antsy to get back.  
"Guidons, guidons" That was the call I used to indicate I was talking to everyone. (I understood later that it specifically refers to flagged units, or companies with guidons, but I didn't really understand that and used it incorrectly but effectively.) "Listen, we need to speed up our search, so be deliberate but we need to pick up our pace." "6,3" the call came back nearly immediately, "3,6" "to be clear, do you want us to conduct a deliberate or a hasty search?" In my call back I attempted to clarify. "3,6 we need to hastily conduct a deliberate search, over" There was silence on the radio as SSG Heddlesten gathered his composure to professionally let me know that what I just sad made no sense. "Sir, we can conduct a hasty search or a deliberate search. They are doctrinally two distinct search techniques. We will do what ever you direct but we can't do both at the same time, over." He was right I wanted it both ways but that was not possible and my lack of clear guidance wasn't helpful.  
I thought hard for a second. I was just directed to speed up our search. On the other hand, that direction came from the same commander who didn't expect to find anything and told me to stop finding stuff. "Guidons, correction take as much time as it takes, over." "6,3, Acknowledged, deliberate search, over"  
Insuring your subordinates understand the purpose of the task can be just as important, or sometimes more important that understanding the task itself. Harkening back to my keyboard class in the seventh grade, I completed the task of filling the page with the correct letters and sentences. In fact, I completed the task more efficiently than the other students, but without understanding the intent of the task I failed to learn how to type effectively and thus failed the mission. The opposite can be just as true. It is my opinion that the term micro-manage is over used to mean anything mismanaged or unmanaged. When I talk about micro managing I’m describing telling people HOW something is to be done and not what and why is to be done. In so doing we stifle creativity and worst of all we discourage smart people from finding solutions that are more efficient, cost effecting, time saving, resource saving, and potentially a better outcome than what we imagined. But that is not the same as being clear about what is to be done.  
Basic leadership starts with 1) a task, 2) a purpose, or reason for the task 3) an end state (in other words an explanation about how to know when the task is complete) and 4)a time line  
Another way to say it similarly is Task, condition, standard  
I also must reiterate here the importance of the last lesson, If you’re the leader, you gotta make decisions! You probably noticed that I am a collaborative leader. Collaboration, information, direction from your boss, are all important but ultimately you have to decide. Once you decide, you own the decision. I see this as one of the toughest things for young leaders to learn. Yes, you want want buy in. Yes, consensus is ideal. But even if everyone agrees with the choice, you can never blame anyone else for the outcome. You, made the choice. This is true in your personal life as well. Stop blaming your parents, your spouse, your work. Decide, and own it.