October 21, 2006 is a day that will stick with me for the rest of my life. It started, as most memorable days do, just like every other day. The 54th EN BN departed only a few days before, but the intensity of the missions made the eight days since my first patrol as a leader seem like months ago. The mission was a clearing of route Kings. As the Marines received intelligence on the location of IEDs and insurgents.
 
e led them right to where they were. Attempted to locate them. Every mission in the early days took us along unfamiliar routes and this was no exception in an are of the city we had not yet traveled in the  
North on Ice south on Ice to Queens. We found an IED just beyond a speed bump designed to slow down cars. The Mobile Assault Platoon (MAP) continued forward with Lieutenant Moran in the lead truck with his crew. As the lead vehicle reached route Queens SSG Hale my vehicle passed route queens.  
The explosion “That was big” I looked back to see who had been hit. But the explosion did not happen behind me but of to the West of the left side of the vehicle. I heard the Roar of the Cougar engine in the back ground as Sergeant First Class Hartman informed me in a panicked voice that one of the Marine HMMVs was hit. His truck raced up the un-cleared route queens and screeched to a halt in time to see ____ running out of the burning  
With those vehicles out of the way we moved the buffalo back and began a slow methodical search for other IEDs that would target the other responders.
       
Doc running into a burning hummv SFC Hartman pulling him back  
Went back for a "wire" garden hose  
wireman 
 
“You have the rest of your life to find it”  
Everyone can call halt at any time.  
Mustard agent and came back to our platoon  
“We have a weapons cache and a potential bunker complex up here” the platoon sergeant, SFC Hartman, relayed on the Battalion radio network. I had a headset over one ear and a speaker mounted next to me on the side of the Buffalo so I could monitor several channels at the same time. I could communicate inside the vehicle “You have to stop finding stuff,” came the exacerbated call over the radio net directly from the Battalion Commander. “We have to bed down for the night.” It was directed strait at me and he was clearly not happy. But I was smiling from ear to ear and I could not be more proud of the team…. Lug Wrench II  
By far the largest cache contained inside the structure were drawings on the walls of us military convoys being attacked with IEDs. A vehicle on the sight contained explosives small caches of munitions were discovered in the surrounding area. All hands either provided security, searched for the munitions or carried projectiles and improvised containers to where they would be disposed of. SFC Hartman carried a projectile that unknown to him or anyone else at the time contained a mustard agent. The Explosive ordnance disposal team detonated the explosives leaving little trace of the munitions. As soon as the disposal was confirmed the BN Commander ordered a hasty ex-fill from the area. Our tiered group returned to camp Ramadi, refueled the vehicles and went to eat at the chow hall. SFC Hartman indicated to me that his arm felt like it was burning. He showed me his red arm which appeared to have a sunburn. He went to the medical facility and they diagnosed it as a sunburn and gave him some cream. I was exhausted and took a nap. SFC Hartman attempted to do the same but the pain in his arm was too great and he went back to C Med. By this time it was beginning to swell with small blisters. The doctor told him it must be a bad rash from something he was exposed to and gave him some other cream. I saw his arm a short time later when he showed it to the company medic who immediately said it looked like muster agent. And escorted him straight back to C Med. Within the hour he was on a bird flying out for treatment. He would spend months at the burn facility at BAMC in San Antonio, TX. He received a skin graft and the doctors confirmed that he had been exposed to a mustered agent.