**17 - May 13: The Contract**  
_Theme: 9/11, ROTC, & Black Swan Events_  
[Chapter 4.5: Part 2]  
"What kind of made up ridiculous rank is that?" I asked my buddy Matt Young when I returned to military duty. He wore a solid black circle on his collar where his rank should be. "I'm a Cadet," he declared proudly. "What the heck is that"? I shrugged. "I'm in the ROTC at Utah State.” My blank stare must have been enough of a clue that his acronym didn’t help me understand any better. He continued, “They‘re paying for me to go to school." I leaned in closer to him and pretended to whisper, "I'm going to Utah State too. They’re giving all of us money for college. I’m pretty sure that's why we're all here." I winked dramatically. "No, It's more than that". He insisted, "I'm on a scholarship, I get a stipend, I'm going to commission as an officer when I graduate." "Wait" I cut him off. I didn't know what a stipend was nor fully appreciate what commissioning meant, but I did understand what scholarship meant. "You mean they are giving you MORE money for doing basically what I'm already doing?" I asked skeptically. "Well you have to take a class, and there's PT (physical fitness), and a leadership lab," He responded. "So basically, no?" I asked. He shook his head. ”I guess, not really." "Well, where do I sign up?" I gestured, signing in the air. I didn’t know anything about ROTC, but I was already in the Army and I was already going to college. They wanted to give me more money and make me an officer; It sounded like a no brainer to me. Paige was not as convinced. We had been married only a few months. She was not thrilled about me being in the Army at all. "Look." I assured her, "I go camping with my Army buddies one weekend a month, they pay me good money to do it, and they are going to give me money for school. I'm in the Army Reserve. If I have to go somewhere, it's World War III and everyone is getting drafted anyway. I might as well be trained to know what I'm doing." That was my literal argument. There was no sign on my horizon, at that time, that I would ever be in harm's way or ever have to be away from her for longer than a two week field problem. August 24th, 2001, I contracted with the ROTC program. The events just a few weeks later of September 11th 2001, would change everything. It would lead to me being home less than three out of the six years after college graduation. This choice to join the ROTC would change the lives of me and my family forever.  
Life is unpredictable, Take advantage of opportunities knowing that it may not turn out the way you anticipated.  
So this was it, we were going to war. The mission of the 854th Quartermaster Company, that I belonged to, was to provide fuel, water, and maintenance support to combat forces. By October 2001 Operation Enduring Freedom had begun; US and other nation’s forces were already on the ground fighting Al-Qaeda suspected to be behind the World Trade Center attacks and their Taliban supporters. Soon there would also be helicopters in the air providing transportation and air support. Those helicopters would need fuel, and an Army Reserve unit would distribute that fuel. That unit was us; or, them at least. When I presented myself for deployment I was hit with this response, ”You ain’t goin anywhere, Cadet!” ”We’re not going?” I asked confused. ”no, we’re going, You’re not going” That didn’t help. He continued. “See this contract? Read right here. You agreed to finish a bachelors degree, Cadet. It’s in your contract. You are non-deployable, Cadet. This fight will be long over by the time you’re done with school.” The multiple references to my status as a Cadet sunk in. A mix of emotions hit me. On one hand, I had trained for years for just this moment. I was no quitter, no coward. I couldn’t help feeling like I was abandoning my team. On the other hand, I felt somewhat relieved not to be going on such an uncertain assignment. Paige, only had one emotion, relief. She cried. She never wanted to marry someone in the military in the first place. When we first met she told me that my status in the Army was a deal breaker. It was our first date, but she was clear it wouldn’t go farther. I had made the same argument I used to convince her that the ROTC was a good idea, ”I go camping with my Army buddies on weekend a month. It’s not like I’m on active duty anyway. Besides, I’m in the Army Reserve, if I’m called up it’s World War III and they will institute the draft again and we’re all going. At least this way I would some training about what to do.” I had believed it. And it was significantly compelling as to convince Paige, She married me after-all, but she made it a point to frequently express that she was still uneasy about the Army. She had been unsettled about my joining the ROTC too. The fact that my contract with the ROTC kept me from deploying helped but not much. She didn’t like it one bit.  
Erik, on the other hand, my battle buddy who had got me through high school, who unintentionally convinced me to join the Army, who gave me great advice as a new missionary, he deployed, and I stayed home.  
Of course the war was not over before I graduated. Few would have predicted it would last 20 years. Fewer were the predictions of how it would end with us haphazardly leaving.  
Not only are our own lives unpredictable the world stage is as unpredictable. Which only further emphasizes the absolute need to take advantages of opportunities but be aware that it may not turn out the way you anticipated.  
"We'll take Dan and you can have all the rest" Dan, the kid picked last, was apparently infinitely more valuable than the other three of us standing there looking around hoping we could play. We didn't even get called out by name, simply referred to as "all the rest". The choosing captain preferred to have us three burdens on the opposing team. The other captain shrugged, uncertain that a man power advantage was worth the liability we posed to his team, but agreed, consigned that if we didn't get in the way to much we could basically watch from on the pitch. People joke about being picked last for teams. As a kid, I would have loved to be picked last; that would mean I was picked by name at all. Once in a while I got to play by being unselected by the choosing side as an offering to the opposing team, as described above.  
Saying I was small and uncoordinated compared to my peers is a major understatement to how physically awkward I was. I wrote in my journal at the end of my sophomore year in high school, "I’ve grown 4 inches, I’m 5’4.” I would grow 7 inches taller in the course of the summer over the next few months. Then I truly was uncoordinated; barely able to figure out how to step over my own, newly enormous feet with my skinny legs. When I signed up for ROTC the Fall of 2001, I learned that the ROTC fielded a team for the Ranger Challenge Competition. Events included a physical fitness test (two minutes of as many push-up, followed by two minutes of as many sit-ups as one could muster, then a two mile run), an obstacle course, a one rope bridge, a land navigation course, and night land navigation course, and several mystery events that could include, first aid, radio communication, shooting, or any other Soldier skills, but would defiantly be physically taxing, all culminating in a 10 kilometer race with full gear and packs. I trained with the team, but made it clear that I wasn't trying to be on the team but was only there to get in shape. As the competition neared, the Captain of the team approached me, "We need you on the team", he said sincerely. I resisted. "You just need an alternate if someone gets hurt. I'm not that good". I protested. "We have an alternate." he insisted "We need you ON the team." I was shocked. I had never felt needed as part of a team before.  
We won the one rope bridge competition with a record time and held our own against other much bigger programs through every event. I was strong and our team was awesome.  
Despite success and demonstrated capability, I continued to compare myself against the most charismatic, the brightest, the strongest, and the fastest. I never quite measured up.  
While humility is a hugely important quality in a leader (more on that later) confidence is equally important. And while comparing ourselves to our peers and aspiring for greatness is good, contentedness, recognition, and gratitude for what we have are equally necessary.  
You are capable of so much more than you think you are.  
A note to caveat this story. This was not an "all good news" event. My new bride was not thrilled that I was spending so much time with my Army buddies, doing “extra-curricular”, ”un-required”, ”goofing off”, things. Worse, I left her at home as I traveled to compete. I mention this here as a reference to previous lessons about regrets and balance. I don't regret the decision I made to participate, I feel that personally, on the whole, I have made the effort to balance competing priorities, BUT, I want to emphasize that what is good for you is not always what is good for everyone. Balance and understanding are required by all sides. Sometimes others make enormous sacrifices for us to be leaders; we should recognize them for that and also sacrifice at times for others to fulfill their commitments and passions.