**Week 38 - Oct 07: The Geyser**  
_Theme: Trauma & Tachypsychia (The Massive IED)_  
[Chapter Nine: Part 2]  
Route Corvette barely accommodated our over-sized trucks with a large dry cannel on the left side to the south of the road and a steep embankment slopping down to the north on the Right side as we cleared West. Suddenly a huge explosion rocked the 23 ton truck I rode in. From the back of the Buffalo I looked past the other two rows of seats and out the front windshield toward where the explosion came. All I could see was a wall of dirt rushing upward like a geyser opened up in front of us. When the dirt fountain finally stopped ascending, chunks of dirt and rocks rained down on top of the truck in a thunderous hail storm. The dust in the cab was over powering making it hard to breath.  
As the dust cleared I could finally see that the explosion did not target my truck but had been a direct hit on the vehicle 15 meters to the front of us. The capsule containing the driver was the only thing on the road on the near side of a huge crater that split the road in half. The small pod was facing us and all of the wheels, axles, frames, and every other part of the truck were sheered off and scattered for football fields in all directions. I could see the top half of Privet Hanson’s body mostly buried in dirt and completely cleared of the operator compartment. He lay motionless. The whole world after that began to move in slow motion. I could see myself, in my mind’s eye, walking up to Privet Hanson’s mom’s house, knocking on the door and asking ”good morning Mrs. Hanson, how’s Kevin doing today?” ”Oh, he’s having a pretty good day.” I heard her say as she let me in to see Hanson in a highchair doing a poor job of putting yogurt in his mouth. With a smile and in broken speech he said “good morning, Lieutenant Sparrow”. I knew he might not make it and if he did, an explosion of that magnitude likely turned his brains to J-E-L-L-O.  
To this day I cannot determine how the rear truck made it around our huge vehicle on that narrow road but even before the dust fully cleared there it was, in front of us. Soldiers on the ground with a litter gently pulled Hanson form the wreckage. The radios were on fire with chatter. I had one to each ear on separate nets (networks).  
“Battle Main this is Wolf, over”  
“Wolf, Battle Main”  
“Battle Main, IED Vicinity grid AA 1234 5678. The road is split by the blast. I have one Vic (Vehicle) stranded on the far side of the blast hole. I have one US unconscious at this time. I need a MEDEVAC at LZ Red. Nine line MEDEVAC request to follow, over” As I spoke SSG Heddlesten spoke over the other net.  
“6, 7, we need a MEDEVAC, I recommend LZ Red. Let me know when you are ready for the nine-line.”  
“7, 6 send it, over” Over one radio I heard SSG Heddlesten relay the Medical Evacuation request into my ear as I passed it on over the other radio.  
“Roger Wolf, Dust off is going wheels up, ETA to LZ Red, 15 Mikes.  
“How long until you can have that bird here 6?”  
“He's going wheels up as we speak. He'll be wheels down at the landing zone in 15 minutes, over”  
"Roger, out." That was the last I heard from him until Dust off was wheels up with Hansen, but there was zero break in the chatter.  
“Wolf, Demon"  
“Demon, Wolf”  
“We are a click (kilometer) out from your location, on the other side. We are moving to secure your stranded vic on the far side of the blast hole, over”  
“Roger Demon, over” (I could hear the roar of the Bradley Fighting vehicles behind me as he turned around to transport Hanson to the LZ as the wine of the engine and the chartering of the tracks became more faint I thought about what I had just said roger to. I had just given the OK to the Abrams tanks of Demon Company to move down an un-cleared road. Clearly there were IEDs. Clearly they were big enough to swallow a tank. At that moment someone else on my team called over the net and expressed the same concern “that’s an uncleared route 6 we need to tell Demon to stand fast.” I formulated the message in my head, I would tell them to stand fast and not go down the route, that we would figure out how to take care of our truck isolated on the far side of the blast crater. The moment had passed… I felt a shiver from an explosion off in the distance. My heart sank. I prayed that what I knew had happened was not true. But I knew it was. The panicked voice over the radio confirmed, “IED! IED! IED!!!” The explosion tossed the 70 ton Abrams tank aside into the dry canal bed onto its top. There was no time to reflect, yet, on what I should have prevented. The radio demanded my attention in my other ear.  
The Bradley carrying Hanson arrived at the Landing Zone at the exact moment that the helicopter landed.  
Then the waiting game began as the hull of Hanson’s vehicle caught fire and the recovery assets were spun up to recover.