**Week 06 - Feb 25: In The Army Now**  
_Theme: Joining for the wrong reasons_  
**[Chapter Three: In The Army Now]** One thing that has come to define much of who I am is my service in the United States Army Reserve. As I remember it, my best friend Erik Kendall showed up to school one day with an Army T-shirt on. Of course, I made fun of him and asked, “What, did you join the Army and for signing your life away they gave you this cheap mass produced lousy T-shirt?” His diverted gaze and serious face told me that was exactly the case. The joking stopped. “You really joined the Army?” I asked seriously. He nodded to affirm. “Why?” I objected. He had never mentioned this was his plan. I was shocked. "Well, I know I want to go the college and I know my parents can't afford to help me. I don't play any sports, so I'm not getting a sports scholarship. My grades aren't that good, certainly not good enough for an academic scholarship. I don't want to go tens of thousands of dollars in debt. The Army says they will pay for me to go to school…" he trailed off a bit, or maybe I stopped listening. Erik and I had a lot in common. We both liked learning, especially science. To be clear, that did not mean we necessarily liked school nor were we particularly good at it. Though he had much more of an aptitude than I did. I recall several projects where I clung tightly to his preverbal coat tails while we engineered our way through some rowdy activities in the name of science. I was not the brains nor the muscle behind some very impressive mouse trap powered cars. But I had contributed some persuasion skills to convince a local saddle bag maker to give us some scrap material to build a water balloon launcher. Then I, some how, helped convince the home economics teacher, Mrs. Dent, to allow us to use her sewing machine to sew the pouch and handle. It wasn’t pretty but it held long enough to launch several voiles across the schoolyard and across the street. We were the coolest kids in school for a hot five seconds until we broke the windshield out of Wes Woodward’s car. Fortunately no one got hurt. We still felt horrible. His dad was upset but super understanding. We had been surprisingly less destructive with the trebuchet and the fireworks we built. Yup, we made fireworks, in school, for a grade. To be fair, the fire department was there, along with the whole town for the homecoming football game. We did have a few terrifying premature explosions on the launch pad and a few, even more heart stopping shots, that went all the way up and all the way back to earth before bursting in a ball of brightly colored burning metal and fire. Guess those guys failed to properly calculate the rate of the gravitational pull compared to the fuse burn rate. Hey, it’s high school chemistry and physics in a small farm town. Not one of us was bound for MIT. But our science teacher, Mr. Warham, will go down as a legend. It was a different time and place for sure. As much fun as we had, we did do some learning. But learning and grades don’t always equate to the same thing, and I, like Erik, didn’t have the grades for an academic scholarship nor the means to pay for it any more than he did. My astute amigo had presented a pretty compelling argument for military service. As he ran though the rational he used to make this extraordinary decision, the reality that I was in very much the same situation sat hard with me and I knew then that I would join the Army. I had played Soldier games as a kid. I loved my country. I had a family history of Soldiers, Sailors, Marines, and Airman, including my name sake, that I respected and admired, but at that time, my reason for joining was purely an attempt to invest in a better future for myself. I should have asked more questions, and done more research, but I didn’t know what questions to ask, or who to ask them to, so I went with what I knew. I asked only one question and made only one request. “Can I be released for two years to serve a mission for my church”, was my only question. “I want to be with my buddy Erik”, was my only request. "Yes, you can go into the inactive ready reserve (IRR) for two years." And "Yes, we can make you a truck driver and you can be in the same unit as your buddy." They gave me the two things I had asked for, I didn't know what else to ask, so I signed up.
 
While this chosen profession defines so much of who I have become, it didn’t come as the career I envisioned myself pursuing in my life. And so it may be true with the people in your organization. They are rarely there because that’s what they wanted to “be” when they grew up. Most of us “fall” into our circumstances. Based on the options before us, we make what we think are the best choices at the time. **Understanding why someone is in the position they are in can be a very powerful insight.** They may be right where they want to be or you may be able to help them use where they are to get to where they want to go. Either way, even when I haven’t ended up where I thought I wanted to be, I have been grateful for the journey that got me there and I am grateful to be where I am. If you expect the people in your charge to stay in the role they are in for more than a couple years you are probably going to be surprised. If you anticipate being in your current position for more than the next 5 years you will likely be surprised again. Train yourself, train your replacement, and your team, create continuity files, and prepare your organization for the day when you and others will move on. Another important note is that **inexperience is not incompetence.** We often overestimate experience and underestimate ability. Asking the right questions leads to good decisions. But inexperience often means not knowing what to ask…. So **start asking questions** and smart people will lead you to know what you didn't know, you didn't know.