**Week 25 - Jul 08: Prey to Kill**  
_Theme: CPT Johnson: Toxic Leadership vs. Values_  
[Chapter Six: Part 2]  
I owe a lot to CPT Johnson, for imparting on me some of his vast tactical wisdom. In many ways I revered him, but he did not like me in the least, nor did he feel that I was ready for the gory reality of combat. CPT Johnson had seen what war was like. He assessed that a naïve, inexperienced lieutenant such as myself had a long way to go not to freeze in the face of death, or crumble at pulling the trigger, or hesitate at ordering others to meet a gruesome fate. He was not wrong. I was naïve, CPT Johnson had won a television while playing poker and directed all of us to use the good fortune to watch a couple of movies that he felt exemplified the hell of war. I respectfully declined. Rooted in my personal values and religious convictions, I had long ago established a personal policy not to watch "R" rated movies. "I'm not asking, I'm ordering" he insisted. He was young, charismatic, capable, and smart. Technically and tactically he was the most proficient in the Battalion, and he knew it. He was also ambitious and arrogant. He seemed determined to be at the helm while our company wiped out the entire insurgent population. He drilled into us an aggressive combat mentality with his motto of "Prey to Kill" the response to which was, "Shoot 'em in the Face". While I understood the inherent brutal nature of our mission, to fight and win, I approached the prospect in a very different way. I grew up on a farm and was familiar with death and even the slaughter and processing of animals. I was not afraid of death, but I did respect it. I read religious text and scripture daily, which are filled with references to conflict, battle, and destruction, but I did not crave it, nor did I delight in the inevitability of shedding blood.  
We held a company leadership meeting each evening at Mob (mobilization) Station. At the end of one meeting CPT Johnson said, as I'm sure he had before, "alright, if there's anything you need, let me know. If there's anything we can do better, let's discuss it." He looked around. Everyone was silent so he opened is mouth as if to adjourn the meeting. I can't really explain why I took that as my queue to air all my grievances but I raised my hand, as if at school. Then, much like a school kid, I didn't wait to be called on to speak. "Sir," I began, "I don't think you going out drinking and gambling is appropriate." The message came out shorter and more blunt than I intended. It was clear but seemed out of nowhere to everyone there. The silence from the shock was thick as depleted uranium armor. I was sure they all had to have thought the same thing at some point but no one had dared to say it. I glanced at my most loyal battle buddy, Lieutenant Peterson, for back up. He shook his head ever so slightly back and forth and looked back with a look that said "this is not the time". I became abruptly aware that I had just called "CHARGE" and began running toward the front of an unconquerable enemy, then looked around and found myself alone, running up the hill with no one following me. I also suddenly realized that this was not the forum, nor was it what the commander meant when he asked to discuss ways we could improve. I also had no concrete evidence of the two allegations with which I had just charged a superior officer but I was already at full tilt and cresting the hill. There was no taking it back now. The awkward silence compelled me to fill the void. I spoke again "While everyone is under general order number one (part of which prohibits consuming alcohol) and up early training hard every day, you stumble in late and sleep in." That did not help my argument and so through the continued shock and deafening silence I made a brief closing argument, "I just don't think it's right, Sir" The commander sat in silence, then finally said "Is that all" in a low tone like a cat biding it's time to pounce. "Yes, Sir" I said. I tried to sound confident but suddenly felt very sheepish. "Anyone else?" He looked around at stunned faces. All shook their heads to the negative. No one spoke "Ok, then this meeting is over, Lieutenant Sparrow, stay here, lets talk." His words were friendly like a an inviting Venus flytrap with an undertone of "wait 'til I get you alone". ”Everyone else is dismissed.“ We stood in unison “Prey to Kill!” We recited together. “Shoot ’em in the Face” Caption Johnson replied with a sneer. "Close the door." he managed through gritted teeth. I did. "Don't you ever speak to me that way" he didn't wait until the door fully closed to start, he had waited long enough. "Yes, Sir" I snapped to attention. This was about to be a one way conversation. "You have no military barring. You are not cut out to be an Army officer and you have no idea what combat is about to be like. Did you even watch those videos I gave you" "No, Sir" I replied "Why the hell not?" He growled. I hesitated to say but ultimately spoke truthfully. "It's against my beliefs to watch rated "R" movies, Sir." "Watch it? You are about to live it! What are you going to do when it's right in front of you?" I did appreciate his intent but I didn't know what else to say. We were both quiet. It wasn't a rhetorical question but I didn't have an answer. He shook his head contemplating "You have an evaluated mission coming up in a coupe days. Do well, and you can keep your job. Perform poorly and I will make sure you never lead a platoon." It was a serious threat. We were both quiet. "Do you have anything to say for yourself?" I was reluctant to say what was on my mind but it came out anyway.  
"I feel like Daniel in the court of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon” I started slowly, my eyes and head down slightly. Then starting to built some courage, I lifted my chin and gaze a little, “when he was commanded to do something contrary to his faith.” I continued building some steam “'Prove me now herewith' he told him." I managed to misquote Daniel with something that sounded more like Malachi, but CPT Johnson had been a preacher at some point in his life and I knew that he understood my reference. There was again an awkward pause as neither of us had anything else to say. "You are dismissed," he said, without any indication as to whether my comment was understood. I attempted a sharp about face but stumbled over myself awkwardly. That had not gone well but I felt great. I had stuck to my values. I also felt sick and panicked that he had probably been right, and I wasn't cut out for this. I did the only thing I knew how to do, I prayed, a lot.  
A strange shuffle of personnel happened over the course of the next couple of days. I don't recall exactly how or why but the battalion staff were required to take part in the same evaluation exercise mentioned by CPT Johnson. Lieutenant Peterson, arguably the best Platoon leader in the battalion at that time, was selected to be a platoon leader for them. Somewhere in that shuffle, there was a change up in Platoon Sergeant leadership as well, and Lieutenant Peterson's strongest Squad leader, Staff Sergeant Stahle, became my Platoon Sergeant and my right hand man for the exercise. For the next three days SFC Stahle carried me metaphorically. His experience, recommendations, directions, and leadership were exceptional. We received the highest marks possible. My career was spared. CPT Johnson avoided me for the next 2 days. When we passed each other in a narrow hallway where confrontation was inevitable he finally said, "You know the only reason you did well on that evaluation is because SSG Stahle made it happen. I knew it. I had a lot of time to think about it. "I know," I said, "isn't it interesting that God works in unexpected ways." He said nothing else and walked away. That may have been the last conversation I ever had with CPT Johnson.  
"Wolf Main, Wolf 2-7, RP, over" My patrol reported our return to base on one of our last training missions. "Good copy Wolf 2-7, break, have Wolf 2-6 report to the CP as soon as he can, Over." It wasn't a strange request, I would be heading there anyway, but by the tone of the request I could tell something was happening. As I walked up to the CP I could see most of the company leadership already gathered. The tension was awkward. First Sergeant finally spoke. ”This is MAJ Trofinoff, from the battalion operations section,” he gestured to a familiar face but we had not interacted. ”Some of you may have met him.” he continued ”CPT Johnson will not be joining us on the deployment. MAJ Trofinoff will be the new Wolf Pack commander.” That was it. No fanfare, little explanation, Johnson's out, Trofinoff's in. I don't know all the details of why and some of what I think I know could be embellished so it sufficed me to say that the Battalion Commander determined some concern serious enough to remove CPT Johnson from command.  
One night, months into the deployment, Lieutenant Peterson stopped me in the dimly lit hallway between our plywood rooms and asked what he appeared to have wanted to ask for a long time. "Did you do anything to ensure CPT Johnson did not to deploy with us?" He was serious. I thought about it. I had desired it, but I hadn't even prayed for it. "No," I replied "but I did pray to be able to endure it and maybe God knew I couldn’t handle it"  
In his book "Good to Great".Jim Collins uses the metaphor of getting the wrong people off the bus to describe the importance of having the right people on the team. I want to be clear that CPT Johnson may not be the wrong person for every bus but he was the wrong person for that bus at that time. I want to stress that I would not be the competent leader I am without his tactical instruction. I also want the reiterate that if there is an issue with value's/character, for me, that is non-negotiable. You can mess up a lot of things, as is apparent by the failure after failure I've demonstrated, but for me you don't get a pass on character.