**Week 44 - Nov 18: Pop-Tarts in Arkansas**  
_Theme: Hospitality vs. Tyranny (The Ripped Patch)_  
[Chapter Eleven: Part 2]  
We left FOB Falcon tired but with heads high, and headed toward FOB Stryker for a short pitstop on the way home, well, home being Camp Ramadi. I could not help reflecting on the last two months. In June of 2007 my platoon had been selected from the nine platoons in the Battalion to go to Bagdad and assist with the troop surge. Our mission had not been entirely clear. I knew we were going East, but that was all I knew. Our first Sergeant, was concerned about how we would be received in Bagdad. He demanded that on the day we left we all line up while he inspected everyone to ensure they had on all their protective gear. The day arrived with all the scrambling and coordination to get a platoon ready for a trip across the country to an area we knew nothing about. First Sergeant came out for his inspection. He was disappointed to see that not everyone had on the gear he required of them. It mattered not that we would miss our scheduled departure time and not arrive until late into the night. He sent us to get all of our gear and put it on which, embarrassingly, took several hours.  
I pause here to make two observations: One, enforcement of standards is an extremely important principal, particularly in the military. I respect the First Sergeant and his enforcement of standards at that moment. However there is a dichotomy, which Jocko Willink better addresses in his book "The Dichotomy of Leadership", that standards have to be balanced with flexibility.  
As addressed in the risk chapter, leaders must be certain that in our attempt to enforce standards we are not causing the very thing we are trying to prevent. Like when the zealous Zeng meets his destiny on his way to avoid it, providing Tai Lung the ability to escape in his very attempt to verify that he could not escape.(yes that is a Kung Fu Panda reference )  
The other reason I mention it is to simply explain why we arrived so late and frustrated with where we had just come from.  
We arrived in the early hours of the morning, tired of traveling, tired of trying to find our way, just plain tired. As we pulled into a large gravel parking lot, not sure where to go, we saw the iconic red castle, symbol of Army Engineers, a welcome sight. A company First Sergeant in the 875th Engineer Battalion from Arkansas welcomed us almost immediately, as if he had waited a long time to greet us. He showed us the way to the motor pool and to our tent. He brought out boxes of Pop Tarts and bottles of Gatorade apologizing that he had so little to give just then, pointing out the chow hall and the dining hours. Dry sugary pastries and warm salty electrolytes never tasted so good. We were stunned and not accustomed to being treated with such hospitality. After a couple hours of rest I made my way to the motor pool. Soldiers for my platoon Were already up and working. I’m sure some of them hadn’t slept. They ran up to me with the biggest grins. "Sir, you know those lights we’ve been trying to get for the whole time we’ve been in Iraq." "yah’, I nodded, confused. "These guys are putting them on our trucks." They nearly skipped back to the motor pool with me like giddy school girls. I soon saw why. "How did you find anything without good lights?" A mechanic asked rhetorically, shaking his head at me as I watched him and his team crawling all over our trucks like skilled spider monkeys, upgrading alternators, changing wiring, and replacing hydraulics. I thanked him genuinely. He apologized that they couldn't do more.  
From there, I made my way to the 875th Tactical Operations Center, an unremarkable building filled with remarkable people. I met the Battalion Commander, LTC Anslow, a short, fiery, lady with a brilliant mind and a friendly smile who reminded me of my mother, tough but caring. For the next month and a half the 875th took care of everything we requested of them and treated us like family. I had never been to Arkansas but when LTC Anslow handed me a Razor Back patch as we left and wished us well, I removed the patch from my own unit and replaced it with hers. (I carry that patch in my uniform pocket to this day to remember the power of a caring leader.)  
We returned to Ramadi triumphantly, still on a bit of an adrenaline rush from a dangerous mission, still on a high from the awards and accolades we just received from strangers turned family, excited to be back with our unit. A few Soldiers came out to greet us, including our company commander MAJ T and First Sergeant. As the Battalion commander and Operations Officer passed by it became immediately obvious that it was a chance passing. "I expect a full report from you," was the only thing he said too me as he passed, before turning to the operations officer and directing "Let's go". As they moved out in the direction of the chow hall the contrast between these and the leaders I just left could not have been more stark.  
I rapped sharply on the Battalion Commander's door prepared with mission statistics to back brief our time away from the flagpole. I wore on my right shoulder the patch of the third infantry division. On my left sleeve I sported the diamond shaped patch with the razor back symbol of the Arkansas National Guard. He noticed immediately. "Take that patch off of him." he angrily directed the Command Sergeant Major who was already in his office when I approached and standing directly to my left across the desk from the commander. The Command Sergeant Major shook his head at me disappointed and ripped the patch off my sleeve with dramatic effect visually and aurally with the sound of the Velcro tearing away. "And I want to see orders authorizing that patch." he glared at the other sleeve. I extended my hand with the paper already highlighted, prepared for the encounter. He didn't even glace at it and refused to take it. The report was over before it started. He was already obviously involved in a conversation with the Command Sergeant Major before I showed up to be a nuisance. I got a lecture about how I worked for him, and whatever vacation I had taken was over, and I could get out of his office. It had been an unnecessary provoking stunt. I wore the patches as a statement and I got the reaction I was looking for. I was fortunate not to be reprimanded more severely.  
But I felt justified. ”Vacation”? Yup, I had just been chillin’ at the beach in my board shorts. I’m still a little too bitter to flesh out the point of my thoughts. This particular commander had been an expert in all things Army Engineer before the current conflict but many things had changed. I and my fellow platoon leaders, we were the experts. We had been to the Clearance courses and we had the experience of living it outside the wire every day. I think he was a little intimidated by that (side note don’t be concerned if you are a leader of people who know more than you, that’s a good thing you have a different role as leader let them be the experts.)  
bottom line On this one, caring goes a long way.