**WRESTLING THE GIANT** _(Text: Chapter Three - Part 3)_  
As I’m sure happens in a lot of venues where boys are put together for any period of time, I’m thinking “Lord of the Flies”, many "boys" at basic training felt the need to establish some kind of male dominance pecking order. One morning, likely a Sunday as that was the day we were left for a few moments without hovering adult supervision, bunks were pushed out of the way to clear a space for fighting, well wrestling as that seemed more tolerable. I had wrestled for a short time in junior high school. Maybe saying “I wrestled” is giving myself too much credit. I never won a match. I’m not even sure if I ever scored a point. I generally spent most of the match with my face shoved into the mat trying to keep from being pinned. but I watched enough WWF (WWE) that I knew, should a miracle occur and I ever found myself as more than face rash bait, the cradle would be my signature finishing move. This is done by hooking one arm around the opponents leg, usually behind the knee, while the other arm hooks around the back of the neck. Hands are lock together while the rest of the body drives the opponent’s shoulders to the mat. It adds meaning to the phase ”balling someone up”, and I was going to do it… In my dreams… maybe. I had no need, nor desire, at that time to find out where I stacked up in manly merit. I was perfectly content to be put at the bottom of the list, by default, for not even trying. I didn’t even care to watch. I simply wanted to enjoy time without drill sergeants yelling at me, rather than be associated with the certain punishment that would follow if the drill sergeant walking in on what he would certainly be consider a fight in the middle of the bay. I laid on my bunk and read my book and dosed a bit, a rare luxury I was not willing to pass on. I was suddenly torn from dreams of better places when someone discovered my hide out. “Sparrow, you haven’t wrestled yet.” someone observed. ”Come on Sparrow,“ others encouraged. ”You should wrestle Lennon,” came a suggestion. The encouragements to join the fray turned to taunting that appeared would not stop until I wrestled someone. Then Privet Philips blurted “ya, come on Sparrow 'you scared.” “Fine,” I thought, “If I’m going to get crushed, I might as well get eaten by the biggest guy in the room”. I had heard said somewhere, that you should never pick a fight with the smallest kid. Even if you win, you still look like a loser for fighting with the smallest guy. Worse, if you lose you will never live down being beaten by the runt. In contrast, if you fight the biggest guy and lose, no big deal, that was to be expected, you don’t lose any credibility. In fact, the likely outcome is that you gain some respect for having the guts to go toe to toe with the brut. Plus, should the off chance occur that you actually win, you will gain status instantly, even if the big guy has no skills. “Alright Philips,” I said “I’ll take you”. I took off my blouse and hung it on the end of the bunk. I made my way past knees sticking out from bunks and Soldiers sitting on the floor to the inside of the circle of gathered spectators. Many who had been less interested in previous contests suddenly paused conversations to see the skinny kid from Idaho get pummeled by this monster. As I stared at him I knew my only chance was be to be fast. I would shoot for his legs and at least get points for a takedown before my face was inevitably smashed into the polished concrete floor. I glanced at the tree trunks that supported his frame. Even if I could get my arms around them I couldn’t lift them. It was too late to devise anything different. ”Shake hands” the self-proclaimed officiator directed. He grabbed my hand and squeezed unnecessarily long and hard, probably to intimidate me. If so, it was working. I pulled away, not because of the pain, although that would have been a good enough reason, but because if I waited any longer I would chicken out. It was now or never. Our hands released signaling the start of the match. I sprang at him like a young lion on an unsuspecting full grown water buffalo. I wrapped my arms around his legs. I struggled the get my hands to touch. Immediately sensing that it was futile, I drove my shoulder into his hips. My face disappeared into his soft pudgy waist. I dug my legs like a lineman clearing a path for a running back coming from the back field. Slowly, maybe even in true slow motion, Goliath lost balance from the surprise attack and fell like a giant redwood. His head smacked the hard floor with such force that my head ached sympathetically. “Oooohhh,” the crowd chorused. I, of course, knew only one finishing move. I spun around putting my back on his chest. I reached around his neck, my right arm not coming out the other side for its thickness. With the other arm I reached down for one leg. I could barely get my hand behind his leg and couldn’t even lift it off the ground . It wasn’t a cradle at all. Mostly I just to laid on top of him, my back to his chest, with my arms stretched out. ”One, Two, Three”, the officiator counted excitedly slapping the floor with each number. He raised my own hand in victory. I made one fist pump then slinked off, breathing hard, knowing better than anyone in the room how lucky I had been. I avoided eye contact and the high-fives from other privets. I brushed off the complaints from Philips that the fight had been unfair, and demands for a rematch. I ignored the challenges from other potential competitors.  
Everyone was fixated on the upset of the day that had just taken place, but I was not interested in gloating or ruining the outcome in any way. My mind carried me to a place and time far away, to a story my dad told me once about my Grandpa Francis. In his own words my dad wrote: Many of the Francis family had gathered at our home to visit. Our little house was getting crowded when I suggested that we go shoot some skeet. We gathered up clay pigeons, shells and guns. As often happens, male egos began to announce great skill and over confidence. Grandpa said little but was obviously following the conversations with amusement. Grandpa's Sons shot, the Son-in-laws shot. Excuses were made. Teasing comments followed each missed shot. It was Grandpa's turn. It had been years since he had hunted or even had a shotgun in his hands. I handed him my Remington Wing-master loaded and ready. He took position and called "PULL!" The clay sprang straight out gathering a bit of elevation... BANG! The clay shattered with an obvious direct to center hit. Well anyone can hit the easy straight out ones ...right... "PULL!" He called again. This time out to the left and jumping skyward the clay soared... BANG! The clay turned to dust. Well two for two, not bad for an old guy who hasn't shot for decades... "PULL!" This time right 45 degrees low and fast...BANG! The clay disappeared into innumerable pieces. 3 for 3, 100%. Grandpa handed me back my shotgun as the “atta-boys” erupted as well as the “lucky shot” comments, “you'll never do that again”, “bet you can't do that again” was said over and over. I quickly loaded another 3 shells and holding my shotgun out towards Grandpa Francis I said "I want to see that again." The reply came back firm and resolved. "No, I think I have proved myself." And he had! No amount of encouraging changed his mind. He said little but he did say that it appeared to him that we were the ones that needed the practice. What would have happened with the next three shots? No one will ever know. But what I do know is Grandpa Francis was a great shot and he knew when he had made his point indisputably perfect. Like Kenny Rogers says “You've got to know when to hold 'em, know when to fold 'em, **know when to walk away**, and know when to run. You never count your money when you're sittin' at the table. There'll be time enough for countin' when the dealin's done.”
 
**Don't Shush the Shusher** _(Text: Chapter Three - Part 4)_  
The thing I struggled with the most at Basic was not the physical or mental challenges. I struggled most with people who could not follow directions. Too many times I recall sitting in an empty room after our drill sergeant gave specific instructions to “clean weapons and be quiet.” Whispering would start, which escalated to quite talking. Then shushing would follow, followed by the shushing of the shushers. Egos got in the way of reason, and arguments ignited over who should “shut up” and who couldn’t tell who to “shut up”. "Shhhhhh." "you shhhhh" ”I don't have to shhhhh.” ”You don't tell me what to do." The drill sergeant would return, make us all do push-ups, then leave with the same instructions as before, “clean weapons and be quiet”. As soon as he left, the fighting would commence again. “We wouldn’t get smoked if you would stop talking”. “You stop talking”. “Why don’t you both stop talking” a third party would chime in. “Why don’t you butt out”. "Why don't you shut up"… It was almost a relief when the drill sergeant would come in again and we would exercise until we couldn’t possibly move any part of our bodies anymore. Then he would leave and it would start all over again. Egos and selfishness sometimes overrule reason and sound judgment. **You cannot allow pride to affect your decisions.** If you do, you will inevitably make poor decisions. You also cannot have a culture of selfishness in a successful organization. Competition? Yes! But when people feel the need to save face despite negative consequences they make rash choices and tear teams apart. One person that never seemed to stop talking was Privet Simmons. With the last name “Sparrow”, I stood right behind PVT Simmons in every line. He would tell me all about his pearl-white Volkswagen Beatle with royal purple shag interior. He went on and on in such detail that I still remember 30 years later. He had participated in JROTC in high school and thought himself to be an expert of all things Army. I was constantly in trouble because Simmons was constantly turned around talking to me. Toward the end of Basic Combat Training, while conducting our field training exercise, the company sat on the outside of a bend in a dry river bed. On the opposite bank our company commander stood talking. The grassy slope curved around perfectly into a natural, miniature amphitheater. The raised bank on the other side made for a natural stage. This was the company’s new commander, not that I had seen the old commander more than once. He was giving some “Hooah” speech that I was less than interested in. - In the Army it is customary to say “Hooah” as a response. Some argue that “Hooah” is actually ”H-U-A”, and like most things in the Army, it is an acronym which stands for Heard Understood and Acknowledged. Whatever it means, it can be somewhat motivating at times but mostly becomes droning and mindless. This commander seemed to prefer "Check" as a replacement to the traditional "Hooah" and was saying “Check” after every sentence; to which we responded with “Check, Sir”. As I sat thinking more about saying “Check” verses “Hooah” than about what was being said, I got the sense that something wasn’t right. All was quiet, too quiet, and although I had heard my share of boring speeches in my life, this one seemed to be dragging out intentionally. He seemed to be stalling for something. I felt uneasy, and while the cool grass invited me to lounge on one elbow as the rest of the Soldiers did, I sat ridged looking around. As I observed, I noticed the drill sergeants in the back passing each other and shooting glances that said to me that something was definitely up but that they were trying to be discrete about it. I elbowed my battle buddy PVT Lennon and signaled to him that something was off, I’m not sure he understood but sat up as well. Then I heard it, a sharp pop followed by a loud hiss; the distinct sound of a CS canister. I reacted without thought. I opened my M40 protective mask case on my left hip with my left hand. I reached in with my right hand and grabbed it firmly. My chin went into the chin rest. My left hand came up to pull the straps tightly onto my head. With my right hand I cleared and sealed the mask. The Army standard to do this is nine seconds. It took me less than four. But now I was certain that I failed… and died. It was completely black and I wasn’t breathing. The first step to dawning the M40 protective mask is to close your eyes and hold your breath, which I was still doing. “Breath!” I told myself. I gasped a first breath. I was alive, but I was still confused by the darkness. “My eyes are closed,” I finally acknowledged to myself. I opened my eyes, but to my surprise it was still dark. Then I felt the distinct burn on the back of my neck where the CS gas began to react with the sweat on my skin. “My hood!” I suddenly realized, was still over the front of my mask. I pulled it over my head and looked out for the first time. I immediately looked to my left to where my battle buddy, PVT Lennon, had been sitting next to me. He looked at me in that same instant having situated his mask simultaneously with me. “Are you good” I asked, muffled through the mask, showing him a questioning thumbs-up. He returned the thumbs-up gesture and muffled through his mask “I’m good. Are you good?” “I’m good,” I said shaking my thumbs-up hand to emphasize. “Good.” He repeated shaking his thumbs-up as we stared at each other. Then slowly my focus shifted past my comrade to what was happening beyond him and all around us. It looked like children were let loose in a hen house and were trying to catch chickens. PVT Lennon and I seemed to be the only two people still sitting and not running around franticly. The scene reminded me of a clip from a cartoon. I watched as one Soldier disoriented, eyes blurred from the gas, and panicked, ran straight on into a large tree. He fell hard on his back, scrambled to his feet again, and ran off into the woods bouncing off trees like a pin ball and out of sight. I watched a female soldier throw the crutches she had hobbled around with and run into the woods in another direction. I watched two people literally run right into each other, both falling backwards and onto their back sides on the ground. “This is crazy,” I thought “It’s like a ridiculous play I’m watching.” Then, as if on queue, I saw PVT Simmons run in from stage right. He stopped center stage, right on the spot where the commander had stood speaking moments before. “Where did that guy go”, I wondered. Simmons was coughing and hacking. As he stood there he reached for and struggled with his mask. He tried to put it on but the effects of the gas had already overcome him. He looked as though he would throw up. Then the mask was on his face. But it was too late. I could see his face clearly, as he looked directly at me through the mask lenses in panic. His eyes grew wide. His body contracted. Then, vomit filled the lower half of his mask, up passed his nose. He couldn’t breathe. His body convulsed. I could see his eyes just over the slurry. They pleaded with me for help. There was nothing I could do but watch. His body trembled like a volcano rumbling before an eruption. His eyes grew wider and then, suddenly, disappeared as he vomited again filling the entire mask. He flopped and twitched and tore the mask from his face, gasping for breath; then finally breathing in deep, forcing gas into his already burning lungs. He bent over throwing up again and again. He tried to run. He stumbled a few steps, vomited, ran a few more, stopped briefly to bend over and vomit again. As he disappeared into the woods I imagined the burning of his face as the gas reacted to the wet mess that was all over him. I couldn’t dwell long. As I turned to my right I saw a drill sergeant approaching fast. I prepared myself for an encounter, seeing him coming towards me and not yet understanding why. Then it became crystal clear. In the panic and chaos Soldier’s gear was strung across the area. Helmets, masks, cases, weapons, and anything he could see, he was after it. I suddenly felt a need to protect it. I began grabbing everything I could get my hands on. PVT Lennon saw what was happening and quickly joined the race. The drill sergeant saw me, he saw what I was doing, and he began working faster. We moved towards each other both determined to get as much stuff as we could. Both with arms full, clinging to straps, scrambling. Then it looked as though we would reach the same last weapon at the same time. I reached out and grabbed it the instant before he did, but his hand was on it. I clung tightly determined to save whoever the owner was from certain destruction at the hand of the drill sergeant. He looked hard at me. Noting my determination he released it with a shove and moved on in search of treasure elsewhere. I couldn’t carry more stuff if I found it. I looked at Lennon who had also collected more than he could comfortably carry. The sun was setting and people were gathering back together. Many covered in vomit looked exhausted and glad the ordeal was finally over. Word got out that Sparrow and Lennon had collected a bunch of stuff. A line formed and many cheered and hugged us as they got their things back. One poor sole at the end of the line was devastated to learn that we did not have his weapon. Then he heard his weapon number being called out by the drill sergeant. He hung his head and slowly moved that direction, not wanting to face the consequences of leaving his weapon. I felt bad for those who faired so poorly through the ordeal. At the same time I couldn’t help but feel proud of the way my battle buddy and I had reacted. I saw Simons still wet from his own fluids. He looked drained. I felt bad for him too, but I couldn’t help but feel somewhat vindicated. I smiled, I knew I shouldn’t, but THAT was the funniest thing I had ever seen in real life. Basic training was almost at its end and Simmons didn't have many more opportunities to turn around and get us both in hot water but when he did, I had only to remind him of standing in the middle of that clearing and throwing up in his mask. “Remember that time?” He didn't want to talk about it. And that kept him quiet. **Lessons learned: 1-Learn your job to the point that it becomes second nature. Plan for the crisis so that when it comes you are prepared and even surprise yourself by how well you react. 2- Be vigilant. 3- Trust your gut about things that don’t seem right. 4- Help other people, even if you don’t have to. Helping others leads to mutual help. Call it Karma or whatever you want to call it. Helping others always returns good works to you. Karma works in the other way too. The deserving eventually get what they deserve.**