**In The Army Now**  
_Theme: Joining for the wrong reasons_  
**[Chapter Three: In The Army Now]** One thing that has come to define much of who I am is my service in the United States Army Reserve. As I remember it, my best friend Erik Kendall showed up to school one day with an Army T-shirt on. Of course, I made fun of him and asked, “What, did you join the Army and for signing your life away they gave you this cheap mass produced lousy T-shirt?” His diverted gaze and serious face told me that was exactly the case. The joking stopped. “You really joined the Army?” I asked seriously. He nodded to affirm. “Why?” I objected. He had never mentioned this was his plan. I was shocked. "Well, I know I want to go the college and I know my parents can't afford to help me. I don't play any sports, so I'm not getting a sports scholarship. My grades aren't that good, certainly not good enough for an academic scholarship. I don't want to go tens of thousands of dollars in debt. The Army says they will pay for me to go to school…" he trailed off a bit, or maybe I stopped listening. Erik and I had a lot in common. We both liked learning, especially science. To be clear, that did not mean we necessarily liked school nor were we particularly good at it. Though he had much more of an aptitude than I did. I recall several projects where I clung tightly to his preverbal coat tails while we engineered our way through some rowdy activities in the name of science. I was not the brains nor the muscle behind some very impressive mouse trap powered cars. But I had contributed some persuasion skills to convince a local saddle bag maker to give us some scrap material to build a water balloon launcher. Then I, some how, helped convince the home economics teacher, Mrs. Dent, to allow us to use her sewing machine to sew the pouch and handle. It wasn’t pretty but it held long enough to launch several voiles across the schoolyard and across the street. We were the coolest kids in school for a hot five seconds until we broke the windshield out of Wes Woodward’s car. Fortunately no one got hurt. We still felt horrible. His dad was upset but super understanding. We had been surprisingly less destructive with the trebuchet and the fireworks we built. Yup, we made fireworks, in school, for a grade. To be fair, the fire department was there, along with the whole town for the homecoming football game. We did have a few terrifying premature explosions on the launch pad and a few, even more heart stopping shots, that went all the way up and all the way back to earth before bursting in a ball of brightly colored burning metal and fire. Guess those guys failed to properly calculate the rate of the gravitational pull compared to the fuse burn rate. Hey, it’s high school chemistry and physics in a small farm town. Not one of us was bound for MIT. But our science teacher, Mr. Warham, will go down as a legend. It was a different time and place for sure. As much fun as we had, we did do some learning. But learning and grades don’t always equate to the same thing, and I, like Erik, didn’t have the grades for an academic scholarship nor the means to pay for it any more than he did. My astute amigo had presented a pretty compelling argument for military service. As he ran though the rational he used to make this extraordinary decision, the reality that I was in very much the same situation sat hard with me and I knew then that I would join the Army. I had played Soldier games as a kid. I loved my country. I had a family history of Soldiers, Sailors, Marines, and Airman, including my name sake, that I respected and admired, but at that time, my reason for joining was purely an attempt to invest in a better future for myself. I should have asked more questions, and done more research, but I didn’t know what questions to ask, or who to ask them to, so I went with what I knew. I asked only one question and made only one request. “Can I be released for two years to serve a mission for my church”, was my only question. “I want to be with my buddy Erik”, was my only request. "Yes, you can go into the inactive ready reserve (IRR) for two years." And "Yes, we can make you a truck driver and you can be in the same unit as your buddy." They gave me the two things I had asked for, I didn't know what else to ask, so I signed up.
 
While this chosen profession defines so much of who I have become, it didn’t come as the career I envisioned myself pursuing in my life. And so it may be true with the people in your organization. They are rarely there because that’s what they wanted to “be” when they grew up. Most of us “fall” into our circumstances. Based on the options before us, we make what we think are the best choices at the time. **Understanding why someone is in the position they are in can be a very powerful insight.** They may be right where they want to be or you may be able to help them use where they are to get to where they want to go. Either way, even when I haven’t ended up where I thought I wanted to be, I have been grateful for the journey that got me there and I am grateful to be where I am. If you expect the people in your charge to stay in the role they are in for more than a couple years you are probably going to be surprised. If you anticipate being in your current position for more than the next 5 years you will likely be surprised again. Train yourself, train your replacement, and your team, create continuity files, and prepare your organization for the day when you and others will move on. Another important note is that **inexperience is not incompetence.** We often overestimate experience and underestimate ability. Asking the right questions leads to good decisions. But inexperience often means not knowing what to ask…. So **start asking questions** and smart people will lead you to know what you didn't know, you didn't know.
 
**Rolling Around, Beating Face, and Getting Smoked**  
**Theme: Drill Sergeants, Push-ups, and "Rolling away"**  
**[Chapter Three: Continued]** Six days after high school graduation I found myself on an airplane on my way to Fort Leonard Wood, MO, for Basic Combat Training. After landing at the Saint Louis Airport and reporting to the USO where I waited for a long bus ride; arriving finally late at night to yelling drill sergeants "welcoming" us to the Army. The first day “down range” was one big show. Drill sergeants from all the companies around came to join in the festivities. There were all kinds of activities that included running around and around the building and not stepping on the grass. Those who stopped running were instantly swarmed by drill sergeants, like a pack of wolfs preying on a wounded deer. I just kept on running. I ran cross-country a little in high school and while I was not fast I had the stamina and the sense that this was not the place for a stroll. The drill sergeants quickly establish themselves as, in charge and not to be messed with. After surviving the initial barrage of drill sergeant vultures, we lined up in front of the building, each of us taking a side walk square. Then we dumped the contents of all we had with us on the cement and inventoried our stuff. Any civilian attire, electronics, candy, luxury, and any "contraband" of any kind, we would not see for a while. It was placed in a bag and locked in a room not to be seen until this chapter of life was over. Notes were made about who would need shoes, soap, razors, and any other deficiencies. We all then marched to the Post Exchange to acquire any missing items. I had been pretty diligent in packing everything on the required packing list and not packing anything extra. Packing for Boy Scout campouts and learning to follow instructions early would serve me well. I stood patiently outside in the newly learned lines and columns of the formation while those who needed things went inside. I stood on the far left column of the formation about five rows from the front. The formation angled in such a way that I could look forward and just to the left side of the head of the person in front of me and have a clear view of my drill sergeant standing, arms folded, just outside the door to the exchange. As I watched him pacing back and forth I thought how grouchy he looked. Then, as if on cue, someone came running out the door of the Exchange and ran right into him, nearly knocking him over. An audible gasp could be heard from everyone who saw. I thought we were all being pretty quiet waiting outside, but the silence suddenly became tangible. I’m certain I saw steam coming from the Drill Sergeant’s ears. “Get down and beat your face!” yelled a drill sergeant, clearly lost for any other words. The look on the face of the offender demonstrated that he was as confused as I was about what the drill sergeant wanted him to do. “Push the earth… knock ‘em out… smoke yourself… DO PUSH-UPS PRIVET!” The drill sergeant screamed. The privet suddenly realized that all those expressions meant one thing. He got down and quickly began the exercise. I was surprised when after only a couple repetitions the drill sergeant barked “Get up!” to which the privet responded by quickly jumping to his feet and snapping to the position of attention; the one thing he had learned so far. “You get up in the morning.” the drill sergeant said with a scowl. “Get back down”. The privet, slightly confused, immediately returned to the ground and began the push-ups again. “Recover!” the drill sergeant instructed. Again the privet sprang to his feet. “You recover in a hospital, get back dooown” the drill sergeant stretched out the word dooown, and this time the corner of his mouth turn up ever so slightly. He was enjoying himself. The privet had no sooner gotten down to do push-ups again when the drill sergeant demanded, “get up”. To which he again scrambled to his feet. “You get up in the morning, get back down.” The privet was clearly confused as to what he should do, but he did as he was directed and got down only to be told to “Recover” as soon as he got close to performing the first push-up. By that time, I was amused. This was entertaining. I wondered how long would this go on and how long it would be before he just stayed down. I smiled a broad smile and even chuckled to myself feeling a little sorry for the kid who had crossed the path of my drill sergeant. As I stood at the far left of the formation watching this poor kid get up and get back down, suddenly a giant head filled my entire view. A hard rimmed brown hat touched just above the bridge of my nose. “You think this is funny?” He screamed, his face so close to mine, his mouth so big I thought he would swallow me whole. All happy feelings were suddenly gone. I felt my stomach in my feet and in my throat. I had been caught laughing at the scene before me and I knew it. “You think this is funny privet?” he yelled again, inches from my face. “I _did_ think it was funny, drill sergeant” I replied emphasizing the “did” to make sure I wasn’t lying about what I had so obviously been caught laughing at, but to indicate that it defiantly wasn’t funny anymore. “Sergeant Shearer we got a privet over here, ‘ thinks this is funny.” He turned back to me. “What platoon are you in privet ….Sparrow?” he asked cocking his head to one side and reading my name tag. “Third Platoon, drill sergeant” I replied crisply. "Oh, h#!! no.” he said shaking his head, “Sergeant Shearer we got one of _YOUR_ privets over here, ‘ thinks you’re funny.” “Get out’a here” my drill sergeant said, motioning with his hand without looking down at the kid on the ground. The previous victim wasted no time, clearly relived to have any reason to disappear. “Come here Privet. You obviously think this looks like fun and you want a turn.” He said mockingly. Then his voice turned stern “Beat your face!” he demanded. At this point I had no confusion about what to do. I hit the ground and started knocking them out. “Get up”, the drill sergeant snapped. “You get up in the morning, drill serGEANT.” I replied loudly emphasizing the end of the word, having thought about what I would do if I were the one on ground, not realizing I would get the chance so quickly. He let me do a few more push-ups and then said in a nice voice trying to catch me. “Ok, Privet you can recover.” “You recover in a hospital drill serGEANT,” I yelled so pleased with myself for not falling for his tricks and playing the game by his rules. I continued the push-ups quite proud of myself. The drill Sargent stared at me for a moment while I did a few more pushups. Then came the command “roll over privet!” ”Roll?” I thought to myself. I don’t know how to respond to that. “ROLL OVER YOU!” The drill sergeant screamed. I thought as quickly as I could. “You only roll… if you’re a dog, drill serGEANT” I stammered through the first thing I could think of and tried to say it with confidence. As I mulled over in my head if what I just said was going to work, the drill sergeant came back quickly, “you are a dog. Now roll over, dog!” I had no response to that. I shrugged my shoulders and started rolling around on the ground. I rolled back and forth, not sure how rolling was much of a punishment but did not complain. The drill sergeant had apparently wanted me to simply roll onto my back to do other exercises, such as flutter kicks, clearly seeing that the push-ups were not tiring me as quickly as he desired. But he was now quite amused, as were the other drill sergeants laughing and pointing as I rolled around. Then an idea occurred to me. I rolled right down the stairs, down the sidewalk, and right on out of there. When I thought I had rolled far enough, I rolled a little farther just to be sure. Then jumped up and discreetly moved back into the formations of other Soldiers all in the same uniform, finding my way back to my platoon where I blended in. The drill sergeants had found some other Privet deserving of their attention. And I was as happy to be off the radar as the guy before me. **Learn quickly. If you’re not learning from other’s mistakes, you are bound to repeat them.** **Don’t take yourself too seriously.** Even the sternest of people often have a heart in there somewhere. Mocking and joking are not appropriate in all situations. Disrespect is never appropriate, but keeping a positive lighthearted attitude can get you through the toughest of situations. **It also doesn’t hurt to have some confidence and grit.**