Second Lieutenant, Platoon Leader  
At one point a young Second Lieutenant (2LT) asked LT Sparrow, without sarcasm, "What are you the worst Lieutenant ever?" To which he was not quick witted enough but should have immediately replied,  
“I may by the worst Lieutenant, but you have heard of me.”
 
**Title**  
**Quote/Summary**  
**Background**  
**Story (or stories) From the Soldier's Perspective**  
**Stories From Other Perspectives**  
**What Happened Since/Where Are They Today**
 
**Background**  
Scott Homer Sparrow grew up in Southeast Idaho on a dairy farm with a few acres of potato fields. In addition to working on the farm he enjoyed science classes, playing in the band, and acting in the school plays. He enlisted into the Army Reserve as a truck driver at 17 and went to Basic Combat Training right after high school. He then went into the Inactive Reserve for two years to serve a religious mission in Costa Rica. Upon his return he rose to the rank of Specialist before attending Utah State University and becoming a Cadet in the Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC). In 2005 he graduated with a degree in Education & Social Studies and commissioned as an Army Engineer Officer. Before deploying he went to Engineer Officer Basic Course, Route Clearance Operator & Leader Courses, and the Explosive Ordnance Clearing Agent Course. When he deployed he left his wife at home with three kids, three years old and younger.
 
**From LT Sparrow's Perspective**  
23 June 2007  
"Wait! What day is it?" I asked suddenly. "I don't know, maybe Thursday," Brummett replied, squinting, his eyes towards the orange haze on the horizon, as if the setting sun held the answer. "It's Saturday," Brown confirmed definitively, staring at his watch. "23 June 2007". "It's Saturday?" I questioned; looking towards the sunset for answers now as well. "Wait, it's June!?" I tried to remember when we had arrived in Arab Jabour, Iraq. It seemed long ago but it was too hard to think for sure. "Huh, June", I repeated to myself.
 
Brown admired the shrapnel embedded on the right side of the RG-31, mine-protective personnel carrier, he had just dismounted from driving.  
"That could have been your head, Brummett." Brown looked at him and smiled, planning to dig it out for a souvenir later.  
"That could have been Krier's head" Hale scowled, "Good thing we took the lead from them". He looked at me with disappointment in his eyes and shook his head. Hale was right. What he didn't say, that all of us knew, was that he had probably saved Krier's life. As the traditional commander of the lead truck it made sense that SSG Hale would have been in the lead, but that day everything had gotten all mixed up.
 
We started that morning with a brief from "Battle 6", the commander of the 1st Battalion, 30th Infantry Regiment. This would be the big push South into an area that had not been occupied by coalition forces since the beginning of the conflict. Intel reports indicated that insurgents used the area as a route to smuggle explosives up the Tigerus River and into Bagdad. It was for this very mission that we had left our Company and Battalion in Ramadi. Missions leading up to this were really for prepositioning and staging. Now we would push deep into the heart of the dragons lair. The road was paved and not in bad shape, making clearance fairly strait forward. A few white clouds dotted an otherwise clear sky. Almost every mission we conducted in Ramadi over the previous nine months we patrolled in the dark. Daylight brought its own challenges but visibility was not one of them. The famous Tigerus river flowed only a few feet from the road in places but was mostly blocked from our view by thick vegetation. Figs and dates grew in abundance here. Unlike most of the rest of the arid nation this area enjoyed the luxury of precious water.
 
We cleared deliberately and methodically to Phase Line “Yellow”, our limit of advance, without finding anything out of the ordinary. As we reached the culvert marking our turn around point, the lead vehicle called back, "Yeah 6, we don’t feel good about this spot at all." The paved asphalt road ended and gravel covered a 15 foot wide stretch across the width of the road before the asphalt stretched on again. "we're just going to get out of your way and you can come on up here and do your thing." SSG Hale was usually more deliberate and specific with his search team but every indication made it clear to them right away that something big was buried there. The Buffalo moved forward. The robotic arm extended. We scratched around in the dirt for over an hour without uncovering anything but rocks. The hard packed gravel made it difficult to interrogate. After an hour of slow methodical digging we backed off a bit. The EOD tech and a small team dismounted the trucks and made a wide pass on foot around to the ditch, then moved back towards the road to see if they could discover any wires or other indications of an improvised explosive device from another angle. The thick vegetation obscured their view and prevented them from getting too close to the road. They returned to the vehicle without any hard evidence of a device, but the hair standing on the back of their necks like static electricity was evidence enough to keep searching. We all had a sense that something big was buried there and no one felt comfortable getting very close to it, on foot, without the protection of an armored vehicle. We moved back up with the buffalo and continued digging. It felt like we had one plastic knife to cut and scrape with. We scratched around blind like trying to find a mirage in the desert.
 
We dug for maybe another 30 minutes, then backed off again for the dismount team to approach the culvert from the other side of the road for a different view. Again they returned with nothing significant to report but a continued affirmation that something must be buried there. We returned to the sand box with our butter knife, scratching and searching. I recommended a spot just on the other side of the main road and off to the side. The operator couldn’t reach it with the arm and the driver inched forward, a bit farther than I intended. Just as the front wheels crossed the center of the culvert I suddenly could clearly see the sky out the front windshield. I felt like an astronaut blasting off in a rocket to space, my head pressing down against the headrest, my back parallel with the ground, my eyes directed forward into the blue sky, the rumbling of an explosion below me, my ears ringing. Then slowly at first and picking up speed, the front end of the truck came crashing back to earth. The chatter over the radio, the rumbling of the engine, all fell silent. Everything was muffled and dusty. Dirt rained down. Every window spider-webbed; eight pains of armored glass shattered. The back door opened. "Come on in" I welcomed, "it's a party in here." The explosion shook some things loose in my head that the platoon might argue were already not well connected. "everybody ok?" a voice called in. "All good" I reported, too quickly to grasp if they truly were. I climbed out the back door and down the ladder to assess the damage. Typically cautious and methodical, I posed for a picture in the enormous blast hole that severed the road in half. Everyone was too busy with important things to take the picture. They were professional Soldiers, executing as trained. While I, normally serious and concerned with security, reporting, and leading, acted a bit aloof. I couldn't get over how naked the truck looked, with the wheels, axel, leaf springs, brackets, everything blasted off the front in the explosion. It was hard to tell even how they had attached. Nothing but the hull remained, now resting in a crater. SPC Lewellen staggered out of the truck assisting SPC Baerga who, with two previous concussions, was being escorted to the CASEVAC vehicle.  
"come over here, Sir. You can ride in the Cougar and listen to the radio" Someone encouraged. Later they admitted it was more to get me out of the way than anything. And probably for the best, while I got my head back on straight.
 
At the same time a young local man, covered in blood, approached the wreckage pushing a wheelbarrow filled with the body of an older man in bad shape. Pieces of the buffalo protruded from the nearly lifeless body of the man in the wheelbarrow. SPC Baerga was shoved aside to make room for the critical patient in the medics truck. Everyone was thinking the same thing. This guy was oddly close to the blast not to be the triggerman who caused it. We had been pocking around for a while and anyone with any sense would have kept their distance. We hadn't seen anyone in the nearly two hours we dug around, making his hiding the device, patience and discipline to wait for the right timing praiseworthy. Regardless of the almost obvious connection, the doc provided immediate medical attention, loaded them both into the truck, and whisked them off to receive emergency care. Despite heroic efforts, the older man eventually succumb to his wounds. The younger man later confessed that he had pulled the trigger for the explosion on the signal from his father, the older man, who was laying where he could see when our vehicle crossed over the buried explosives. I was extremely proud of my team for rendering first aid to the guy who just tried to kill us. It was ethically the right thing to do and they didn't hesitate.
 
We all made our way to the combat outpost after the recovery crew managed to connect the buffalo to the wrecker, no small feat with everything completely sheared from the front of the truck. A physician's assistant examined me at COP Red. It was the first time a medical professional had filled out any paperwork on me associated with an explosion. "I recommend no missions for 14 days" he said, handing me the paper." I looked him square in the eye.  
"Sir, that's not an option. There's no place for me to stay here, even if I wanted to. I'm about to walk out that door, get in a truck, and clear a route back to the FOB where my cot is." He shook his head.  
"I can only make recommendations," he said reluctantly. I folded the paper in half a couple of times, jammed it through my loose body armor into a breast pocket already soaked with sweat, tightened the straps around my torso, replaced my helmet, nodded at the PA with a half-smile, and walked out. A few steps out the door SSG Heddlesten intercepted me and broke down a plan. "We need a couple of trucks to escort the wrecker with the buffalo to FOB Striker. I'll take Young's team with me. The rest of you could probably go back too Falcon with the EOD team. No sense in all of us going to Striker."  
"Makes sense," I agreed.  
"I don't think this thing is coming up anytime soon," he said, referring to the Buffalo, "but maybe we can work out a temporary replacement. Who can drive a buffalo?" he looked at SSG Brummett. I stared at the palm trees while they figured it out.  
"Where do you want me?" I inquired when it looked like that had it worked out.  
"You can jump in with Hale." SSG Heddlesten directed. I was still a bit loopy from the blast and happy to have Heddlesten calling the shots. After a quick confirmation that everyone knew where they were riding, and where they were going, we conducted a radio check, and pulled back onto the road.
 
We hadn't gone more than a few hundred meters when SSG Hale began complaining loudly through the internal headset, "Why is SGT Young in the lead in that HMMVE? We should be in the lead."  
"Makes sense to me." I concurred. A halt was called over the radio to the patrol.  
"2,1 is going to take the lead with all elements going to Falcon in trace; followed by the team going to Stryker in their order of march." It was an awkward shifting of vehicles. We were only a few miles from where we would split up but it did make sense to have the more survivable RG in the lead, in case something happened, which it probably wouldn't.
 
We started rolling again. I looked out the window on the right side from where I sat. I felt much closer to the ground than from my traditional seat high off the ground in the Buffalo. "This is a pretty good platform to find IEDs in", I thought. A track from a Bradley fighting vehicle laying on the side of the road caught my attention as we approached. I stared hard at it. Something didn't seem right about it but I couldn't see anything. The window in front of my face suddenly shattered. The explosion was sharp and close. Not deep and core shaking like what I felt a couple of hours before in the buffalo. It felt like it bore through my ear and into my brain. My ears rang, My head ached. The blast shoved the heavy track I had been staring at neatly out of the way, reveling a fresh crater. It wasn't a big hole, by most standards we were used to, maybe a couple of feet deep and less than two feet wide. The attack had been directional; a strategy called "grape shot" or an improvised claymore mine. Basically, a container, coffee can, etc. with explosives packed into the bottom a-topped with anything that could be used as shrapnel. Nails, screws, bolts, even rocks or glass could be used. In this case it was something medal, probably ball bearings, that struck the vehicle high on the passenger side. The trajectory unmistakably targeted the gunner of a HUMWV. Had we not changed the order of march the blast would likely have severed SGT Krier's head off.
 
I don't remember much after that. SPC Brown later told me that he was pretty sure I had lost consciousness for a short time and vomited in the back of his truck; which he had to clean up. Sorry Brown, and thank you. I vaguely remembered 2/7 breaking off and then we were climbing out of the truck in front of the aid station. It suddenly occurred to me that someone would ask me the date and I wanted to be prepared. That is when I asked about the day. Was it really Saturday? I remember thinking about Sunday and wondering if I had gone to church the week before. I couldn't remember. We entered the aid station like we had gotten drunk and rowdy, and then walked into a bar. We all talked way to loud, which didn't help with my headache but everything was hilarious. The nurses separated us to different corners of the room but it wasn't nearly far enough. I could hear other's answers to the questions being asked and was repeating them. "What day of the week is it?" "Saturday," I head Brown say. "Saturday," the rest of us blurted out then giggled like 1st graders telling fart jokes in class. "Speak up Brown, I can't hear the answers." We all laughed again hysterically. We nearly got kicked out of the aid station.
 
"Please repeat back to me the words I gave you earlier". The examiner directed. “Had he told me words to remember earlier in the exam?” I wondered to myself. I couldn’t remember. It didn’t matter, I knew what words he wanted, “Apple, Bubble, Elbow, Saddle, Ladder.” He wrote something on his paper. The Military Acute Concussion Evaluation, or MACE, was designed to help assess if someone suffers short term memory loss from a concussion. But by storing the information in long term memory, it is harder to diagnose and easier to continue patrols.
   

It was a stupid idea. But kept us out front doing what we felt we needed to do to protect those who came behind us. We were back out the next day and found an IED in an MRE bag, near where we were hit the day before. The day after that we found a fire extinguisher filled with explosives and shot the triggerman. And again and again. We couldn't stop for a little headache; we had a mission to do. So we drove on.
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Through eight pains of armored glass I stared almost directly North up Tower road; named for the large water tower I could see a few hundred meters away. Not the most cleverly named road but sufficiently clear to all as a frame of reference. The Buffalo mine resistant ambush protected (MRAP) vehicle I rode in sat broad side in the intersection interrogating a likely explosive device. The intersection, aptly named “Firecracker”, burst out in six directions. In addition to Tower to the North, most notably, Route Ice-cream extended to the South, and Racetrack continued to the East. Search lights beamed like beacons from the 13 feet tall and 27 feet long six wheeled monstrosity that made the broad side of a barn seem like a small target in comparison. IEDs, to some extent, were no match for our robotic arm and V shaped hull that dispersed the blast, protecting the occupants. This IED lay near the raised median in the center of the road. The Buffalo stretched across both North bound lanes on the East side of the road. The devise was somewhat small and not a huge threat to us. I considered the size and placement: small and out of the center of the roadway, where the damage to the targeted vehicle would be minimized. Was it an attempt to conceal it better? Not likely, I answered my own question. It was not that well concealed. Then I broadened my view and understood immediately. This IED was designed exactly to force us to position the buffalo in such a way that we would be broad side in the intersection. If I were fighting us I would put a decoy in the road here and ambush the buffalo with an RPG from right over there. Like solving a murder mystery just in time to get murdered; I looked out to the nearest building to see a middle aged man step around the corner, drop to one knee, steady a rocket propelled grenade launcher on his shoulder, and fire it right at me. I had no time to react, no weapon to engage with in time, no time to call on the radio, no time even to pray. That rocket tracked straight for my face. "Well, it's been a good run." was all I thought. At the last nano-second the rocket veered off course, flying exactly below me and bounced off the tire on the opposite side of the truck. It skipped toward the rear of the truck and exploded directly behind the buffalo, directly in front of SSG Heddlesten's truck. The explosion peppered SGT Krier in the gun turret with shrapnel and left him reeling from the concussion of the blast so close to him while he was exposed outside the truck. "Is everyone ok?" I asked the occupants of my truck and got a thumbs up from everyone. I heard radio chatter but didn't understand it. Nor did I try to. Without thinking there was anyone else effected by the blast I cut in. "Break, Break, Break, everyone in the buffalo is ok!" I confirmed.
   

Before leaving for Iraq my Stake President (an ecclesiastical leader equivalent to the head of a Diocese or leader of multiple congregations) gave me a priesthood blessing. He laid his hands on my head and declared that if I remained faithful I would be protected. Those words gave me a great deal of comfort and a great deal of confidence. I recognized many times including this one, that I was spared from great injury or certain death and that I could not equate to simple luck or serendipity. I felt that a higher force provided protection to my platoon and to me personally. I do not for a second, claim to be of any greater value, or more faithful, or more important than any other soul, only that, for whatever reason, I was granted that promised protection.
 
That blessing, while the positive impact was inestimable, also contributed, somewhat, to my aversion of receiving medical care for myself. I felt, to some degree, that recognizing an injury would minimize my acknowledgment of divine intervention; that it demonstrated a lack of gratitude and faith. I recognize with some maturity that those things can coexist. At that point, on that day, I was simply glad to be alive.
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
On 21 OCT 2006, early on in the deployment, we cleared in support of operation Tarheels for the 1/6 Marines. Our clearance route took us down one road for a few blocks before we made a hard right and cleared East for one block then left to clear towards the North on a parallel street. The Marine Mobile Assault Platoon (MAP), under the direction of Bronco 6, who had followed in our trace, maintained their trajectory straight when we turned to the right and paralleled our movement from one block away, with the intent of protecting that flank from a potential attack. As we passed through the next intersection a massive explosion shook us from a block away. The fireball that followed illuminated through the darkened streets. Our casualty evacuation (CASEVAC) vehicle raced down an uncleared road to the rescue. Once they were in route to C-Med the buffalo was called forward to search for secondary devices ahead of getting a crew in to clean up the wreckage. We arrived to a gruesome scene. The explosion had thrown the armored HMMWV over a six foot wall and onto it's top. Fuel accelerants immediately dowsed everything and caught it all on fire. There was not room for us to maneuver the buffalo past the burning wreckage. SSG Bratcher the EOD Tech stood up, chambered a round in his M4, and glanced at me as he passed on the way out the door. SSG Brummett didn't miss a beat. He stood up chambered a round in his M4 ensured his weapon was on safe and nodded at me as he passed out the door. I keyed the radio. "Wolf 2/6, Wolf 2/2, and the EOD tech from the buffalo are on the deck, over." I removed my headset, stood, chambered a 5.56mm round in my M4 Carbine and stepped out the door onto the back deck of the buffalo where SSG Bratcher was climbing down the ladder and SSG Brummett scanned, weapon at the ready providing cover while he moved. SSG Brummett motioned that he would cover as I descended as well. I slung my weapon across my back momentarily and climbed quickly to the ground. I swung the weapon quickly back to my front and to the ready scanning which signaled SSG Brummett to descend. We then followed SSG Bratcher who cautiously searched a pile of trash for explosive devices. He reached out the mussel of his rifle and partially lifted the lid to a metal container approximately 9" x 9" square and about 18" tall. I thought I had seen wires inside but couldn't say for sure. As he reached out his hand to lift the lid, which had flopped back closed, I leaned forward and peered at a 115mm mortar with wires protruding from the top. I knew in that moment that I was about to be pink mist and there was nothing anyone could do to put my pieces back together again. I looked a SSG Bratcher with panic in my face. His eyes told me everything I needed to know. His eyes said, "Don't panic, we don't want to alert anyone who may be watching for the right time to pull the trigger to know that we know it is there."  
"We need to get everyone off the street." he said in a low calm voice. I turned to a Marine a few steps from me. "There is an IED right over there" I tried to point with my eyes. "You need to get off the street." He looked at me and cocked his head to the side. I either hadn't spoken loud enough or he simply had not understood the gravity because I spoke about it so calmly. I walked right up to him and said to his face. "IED, Over there. Get off the street". He took two panicked steps back which led me to believe he understood. But then he stopped, leading me to believe that he may have understood what I said but he didn't understand what to do. I grabbed him by the sleeve and physically moved him behind a wall across the street. SSG Bratcher had moved two other Marines off the street and passed the word to SSG Brummett who climbed back into the Buffalo to relay to the team on the radio. SSG Bratcher moved back to the ladder and I found myself alone on the street passing back to close for comfort away from the IED. Back in the buffalo I relayed clearly to the Marines what we found and advised them to get everyone off the street because we were about to integrate it with the buffalo. I watched Marines peering around walls and while I couldn't hear what was being told to them I saw the recognition in their faces that they finally understood and were scrambling to get as far away from the device as possible. The arm reached around the corner somewhat blindly. Pretty quickly and smoothly the arm operator pulled the container away from the wall and tipping it on its side, then reaching in with the claws and lifting it about 6 feet off the ground. "Dump it out." SSG Bratcher directed. A quick flip of the wrist and the container was upside-down at the end of the fork. The loose lid struggled to hold the contents inside and slowly it began to slide out. Just as the round left the container it exploded. I jumped in my chair. I had been tense about it going off since I stared it in the face and while I was completely fine it felt too close. "Is everyone ok?" I called on both our network and the Marine channel. Even before the operator could replace the robotic arm, SSG Bratcher was standing and again chambering a round in his M4. I looked at SSG Brummett who was doing the same and followed suit. On the ground we searched again for explosives, Took pictures of the blast crater and collected evidence from the site. It was a bad day for the Marines. Three men burned to death, two others would be scared for the rest of their lives after years of pain and multiple surgeries, and it could have been a lot worse.
   

Many things contributed the perfect storm for not acknowledging concussive blasts as injuries. In addition to the our sense of duty and not wanting to be removed from missions, we saw first hand the injuries of fellow Marines, Soldiers, and Seamen. It is difficult to see multiple, visible, life altering injuries impact those fighting by your side and not downplay a headache or being rendered unconscious for a short time. As the platoon leader, I am personally responsible for perpetuating the stigma against receiving treatment for concussive injuries. While I am not sorry for an aggressive attitude and posture which I believe ultimately saved lives, I personally and publicly apologize for the long term effects felt by individuals deserving of awards or treatment who did not receive it because of my actions or lack of actions. I commit to assisting any and all cases, however long it takes, until everyone receives deserved recognition and care.
 
**Stories From Other Perspectives**
    
**What Happened Since/Where Are They Today**  
LT Sparrow remained in the Army. He taught ROTC for three year and he and his wife had a fourth child. He deployed to Afghanistan in 2010 as the Commander of the 744th EN CO conducting route clearance. After which he transitioned to Active Reserve status. He served in emergency response, operations, planning, and project management, moving from Utah to Alabama, Pennsylvania, and Texas. He ultimately reached the rank of Lieutenant Colonel and served as the Professor of Military Science at California State University, Fullerton.
 
Scott developed Parkinson's Disease at the young age of 40, likely due to exposure to so many blasts. He loves the Army and desperately wanted to continue his military service but was ultimately medically retired after over 30 years of total time served. He now spends most of his time in efforts to instruct, coach, and mentor others, especially young leader who he hopes are inspired by these stories. He is an advocate and involved in helping others to tell their story.