**MAR 11: WRESTLING THE GIANT** _(Text: Chapter Three - Part 3)_  
As I’m sure happens in a lot of venues where boys are put together for any period of time, I’m thinking “Lord of the Flies”, many "boys" at basic training felt the need to establish some kind of male dominance pecking order. One morning, likely a Sunday as that was the day we were left for a few moments without hovering adult supervision, bunks were pushed out of the way to clear a space for fighting, well wrestling as that seemed more tolerable. I had wrestled for a short time in junior high school. Maybe saying “I wrestled” is giving myself too much credit. I never won a match. I’m not even sure if I ever scored a point. I generally spent most of the match with my face shoved into the mat trying to keep from being pinned. but I watched enough WWF (WWE) that I knew, should a miracle occur and I ever found myself as more than face rash bait, the cradle would be my signature finishing move. This is done by hooking one arm around the opponents leg, usually behind the knee, while the other arm hooks around the back of the neck. Hands are lock together while the rest of the body drives the opponent’s shoulders to the mat. It adds meaning to the phase ”balling someone up”, and I was going to do it… In my dreams… maybe. I had no need, nor desire, at that time to find out where I stacked up in manly merit. I was perfectly content to be put at the bottom of the list, by default, for not even trying. I didn’t even care to watch. I simply wanted to enjoy time without drill sergeants yelling at me, rather than be associated with the certain punishment that would follow if the drill sergeant walking in on what he would certainly be consider a fight in the middle of the bay. I laid on my bunk and read my book and dosed a bit, a rare luxury I was not willing to pass on. I was suddenly torn from dreams of better places when someone discovered my hide out. “Sparrow, you haven’t wrestled yet.” someone observed. ”Come on Sparrow,“ others encouraged. ”You should wrestle Lennon,” came a suggestion. The encouragements to join the fray turned to taunting that appeared would not stop until I wrestled someone. Then Privet Philips blurted “ya, come on Sparrow 'you scared.” “Fine,” I thought, “If I’m going to get crushed, I might as well get eaten by the biggest guy in the room”. I had heard said somewhere, that you should never pick a fight with the smallest kid. Even if you win, you still look like a loser for fighting with the smallest guy. Worse, if you lose you will never live down being beaten by the runt. In contrast, if you fight the biggest guy and lose, no big deal, that was to be expected, you don’t lose any credibility. In fact, the likely outcome is that you gain some respect for having the guts to go toe to toe with the brut. Plus, should the off chance occur that you actually win, you will gain status instantly, even if the big guy has no skills. “Alright Philips,” I said “I’ll take you”. I took off my blouse and hung it on the end of the bunk. I made my way past knees sticking out from bunks and Soldiers sitting on the floor to the inside of the circle of gathered spectators. Many who had been less interested in previous contests suddenly paused conversations to see the skinny kid from Idaho get pummeled by this monster. As I stared at him I knew my only chance was be to be fast. I would shoot for his legs and at least get points for a takedown before my face was inevitably smashed into the polished concrete floor. I glanced at the tree trunks that supported his frame. Even if I could get my arms around them I couldn’t lift them. It was too late to devise anything different. ”Shake hands” the self-proclaimed officiator directed. He grabbed my hand and squeezed unnecessarily long and hard, probably to intimidate me. If so, it was working. I pulled away, not because of the pain, although that would have been a good enough reason, but because if I waited any longer I would chicken out. It was now or never. Our hands released signaling the start of the match. I sprang at him like a young lion on an unsuspecting full grown water buffalo. I wrapped my arms around his legs. I struggled the get my hands to touch. Immediately sensing that it was futile, I drove my shoulder into his hips. My face disappeared into his soft pudgy waist. I dug my legs like a lineman clearing a path for a running back coming from the back field. Slowly, maybe even in true slow motion, Goliath lost balance from the surprise attack and fell like a giant redwood. His head smacked the hard floor with such force that my head ached sympathetically. “Oooohhh,” the crowd chorused. I, of course, knew only one finishing move. I spun around putting my back on his chest. I reached around his neck, my right arm not coming out the other side for its thickness. With the other arm I reached down for one leg. I could barely get my hand behind his leg and couldn’t even lift it off the ground . It wasn’t a cradle at all. Mostly I just to laid on top of him, my back to his chest, with my arms stretched out. ”One, Two, Three”, the officiator counted excitedly slapping the floor with each number. He raised my own hand in victory. I made one fist pump then slinked off, breathing hard, knowing better than anyone in the room how lucky I had been. I avoided eye contact and the high-fives from other privets. I brushed off the complaints from Philips that the fight had been unfair, and demands for a rematch. I ignored the challenges from other potential competitors.  
Everyone was fixated on the upset of the day that had just taken place, but I was not interested in gloating or ruining the outcome in any way. My mind carried me to a place and time far away, to a story my dad told me once about my Grandpa Francis. In his own words my dad wrote: Many of the Francis family had gathered at our home to visit. Our little house was getting crowded when I suggested that we go shoot some skeet. We gathered up clay pigeons, shells and guns. As often happens, male egos began to announce great skill and over confidence. Grandpa said little but was obviously following the conversations with amusement. Grandpa's Sons shot, the Son-in-laws shot. Excuses were made. Teasing comments followed each missed shot. It was Grandpa's turn. It had been years since he had hunted or even had a shotgun in his hands. I handed him my Remington Wing-master loaded and ready. He took position and called "PULL!" The clay sprang straight out gathering a bit of elevation... BANG! The clay shattered with an obvious direct to center hit. Well anyone can hit the easy straight out ones ...right... "PULL!" He called again. This time out to the left and jumping skyward the clay soared... BANG! The clay turned to dust. Well two for two, not bad for an old guy who hasn't shot for decades... "PULL!" This time right 45 degrees low and fast...BANG! The clay disappeared into innumerable pieces. 3 for 3, 100%. Grandpa handed me back my shotgun as the “atta-boys” erupted as well as the “lucky shot” comments, “you'll never do that again”, “bet you can't do that again” was said over and over. I quickly loaded another 3 shells and holding my shotgun out towards Grandpa Francis I said "I want to see that again." The reply came back firm and resolved. "No, I think I have proved myself." And he had! No amount of encouraging changed his mind. He said little but he did say that it appeared to him that we were the ones that needed the practice. What would have happened with the next three shots? No one will ever know. But what I do know is Grandpa Francis was a great shot and he knew when he had made his point indisputably perfect. Like Kenny Rogers says “You've got to know when to hold 'em, know when to fold 'em, **know when to walk away**, and know when to run. You never count your money when you're sittin' at the table. There'll be time enough for countin' when the dealin's done.”