On his first combat mission PFC Kevin Hansen was assigned as the “spotter” in the lead vehicle of a route clearance patrol in downtown Ramadi, Iraq. Though he was vocal about being nervous, he willingly accepted his duty to find Improvised explosive devices (IED). He had a reason to be hesitant. This was the Sunni triangle in the fall of 2006 and the insurgency and become adept at killing Soldiers, Marines, and Coalition partners with well manufactured, well hidden, explosives. The four Soldier crew consisted of PFC Hansen, SPC Brown, the driver, SSG Hale, SPC Hansen’s Squad Leader and the vehicle commander, and SPC Orton, the gunner. While it was everyone’s duty to look for explosives, this was SPC Hansen’s primary duty. Just after dark 2nd Platoon B Company of the 321st Engineer Battalion exited Ogden Gate, turned left, and headed north across the Euphrates River with SPC Hansen in the lead vehicle. The vehicle commander called up their front line trace at check point 294 and reported that they had established a strong point blocking position facing East down route Michigan. The Platoon leader (PL) acknowledged as he opened the door of my truck to let in the Marine explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) technician, Staff Sergeant SSG) Bratcher. The PL reported to the platoon that we had EOD on board and my vehicle fell into a staggered column behind and to the right of the lead truck. Less than a minute later an explosion rocked the truck in lead. It caught us completely by surprise.  
The concussion from the blast knocked out all the power to the vehicle. With a flash the bright lights used to look for explosives went dark. All radios went silent. Fortunately no one sustained visible injuries from the Rocket Propelled Grenade (RPG) that smashed the vehicle. The vehicle and crew went back to Camp Ramadi and prepared to patrol again.  
When he got out of the truck PFC Hansen said, “That was better than the best video game on high volume ever.”   On the next eight missions SPC Hansen left the wire his vehicle was hit eight times. If there had been a prize for the most attacked Soldier, SPC Hansen held a nine for nine record.   In June of 2007 with the troop surge in full swing in Iraq and with Al Anbar Province a much calmer place, 2nd Platoon was selected to go to an area south of Bagdad that had not been occupied by coalition forces since the beginning of the conflict. It was the route by which explosives were smuggled up the Tigerus River and into Bagdad.  
On one mission as we cleared West along a narrow dirt road with a large cannel on the left (South) side and a steep embankment on the Right (North) side, the road barely wide enough for our large vehicles, suddenly a huge explosion rocked the 23 ton truck in which I rode. From the back of the Buffalo I looked past the other two rows of seats and out the front windshield from where the explosion came. All I could see was a wall of dirt rushing upward like a geyser had opened up in front of us. It seemed to last forever and before it clearer chunks of dirt and rocks rained down on top of the truck in a thunderous hail storm. The dust in the cab was over powering and made it hard to breath. As the dust cleared I could see that the explosion was not targeting my truck but had been a direct hit on the vehicle 20 meters to the front of us. The capsule containing the driver was the only thing on the road on the near side of a huge crater that split the road in half. The small pod was facing us and all of the wheels, axles, frames, and every other part of the truck were sheered of and scattered for 100s of meters in all directions. I could see the top half of Privet Hanson’s body as it was half way out of the roof of the operator compartment. He lay motionless. The whole world after that began to move in slow motion.
 
I imagined in my mind’s eye, me walking up to Privet Hanson’s mom’s house, knocking on the door, and asking ”good morning Mrs. Hanson, how’s Kevin doing today?” “Oh he’s having a pretty good day” she said in my nightmarish daydream. As I was let in I could see Hansen in a highchair made for an adult, Kevin, doing a poor job of putting yogurt in his mouth. With a smile and in broken speech saying “good morning, Lieutenant Sparrow”. It had not happened but I knew he might not make it and if he did I was certain that an explosion of that magnitude likely had turned his brains to J-E-L-L-O pudding.
 
To this day I cannot determine how the rear truck made it around our huge vehicle on that narrow road but even before the dust fully cleared there it was in front of us. Soldiers on the ground with a litter gently pulling Hanson form the wreckage. The radios were on fire with chatter. I had one to each ear on separate nets (networks).
 
“Battle Main this is Wolf, over”  
“Wolf, Battle Main”  
“Battle Main, IED Vicinity grid AA 1234 5678. The road is split by the blast. I have one Vic (Vehicle) stranded on the far side of the blast hole. I have one US unconscious at this time. I need MEDEVAC at LZ (landing Zone) Red. Nine line MEDEVAC request to follow, over.” As I spoke SSG Heddlesten spoke into my ear over the other net.  
“6, 7, we need a MEDEVAC, recommend LZ Red. Let me know when you are ready for the nine-line.”  
“7, 6, send it, over” Over the other net I heard “send the nine line”  
as SSG Heddlesten spoke in one ear I spoke on the other radio.  
“Rodger Wolf, Dust off going wheels up, ETA to LZ Red, 15 Mikes (minutes).”  
“Acknowledged, wheels up, LZ RED, 15 Mikes” As I Spoke, SSG Heddlesten was calm but desperate in my other ear.  
“How long until you can have that bird here 6?”  
“He’ll be wheels down at LZ RED in 15 minutes, over”  
"Roger, out" that was the last I heard from him until Dust off was wheels up with Hansen but there was zero break in the chatter  
“Wolf, Demon”  
“Demon, Wolf”  
“We are a click (kilometer) out from your location, on the far side. We are moving to secure your stranded vic on the far side, over”  
“Roger Demon, over” (I could hear the roar of one of the two Bradley Fighting vehicles as it turned around to transport Hanson to the LZ. As the wine of the engine and the chartering of the tracks became fainter I thought about what I had just said roger to. I had just given the OK for the Abrams tanks of Demon Company to move down an un-cleared road. Clearly there were IEDs. Clearly they were big enough to swallow a tank. I keyed the mike to call them back and tell them to stand fast and not go down the route, and that we would figure out how to take care of our truck isolated on the far side of the blast crater. But the moment had passed… I felt a shiver from an explosion off in the distance. My heart sank. I prayed that what I knew had happened was not true. But I knew it was. The panicked voice over the radio confirmed, “**IED! IED! IED!!!”** The explosion tossed the 70 ton Abrams tank aside into the dry canal bed onto its top. Two brave Soldiers that I never met lost their lives in route to aid my platoon, but there was no time to reflect on what I should have prevented. The radio demanded my attention in my other ear.  
“6, 3”  
“Send it 3”  
“My gunner just spotted the trigger man 500m to the north of our position directly in line with this power line. Are there any friendlies in that area? Over”  
I confirmed, “3, 6, there are no friendlies in that area, over”  
“6, 3, permission to engage”  
“3, 6, I am not seeing what your gunner sees. If he has PID (positive identification of an enemy threat) he is clear to engage. CPL Krier was not the one speaking he was zeroed in on his target but as I spoke and he head the green light through his headset I instantly heard the distinct bark of 5, maybe a 6 round burst from the M 240-B Machine Gun. I keyed in on the target. CPL Krier and been deadly accurate, from what later was confirmed to be over 800 meters away. Two bullets skipped off the dirt, the next hit knee high, and the next three rounds impacted center mass. The remaining Bradley fighting vehicle in my formation followed the rounds in on impact as well. The 25mm cannon engaged. Palm trees surrounding the target snapped and exploded and the car of the enemy caught fire and caused a secondary explosion.  
The Bradley carrying Hanson arrived at the Landing Zone at the exact moment that the helicopter landed. The waiting game began as the hull of the vehicle he had been in caught fire and the recovery assets were spun up to recover.
 
That Husky PVT Hansen rode in could not be recovered. The fire burned for hours, so hot that many parts melted to the ground. I received When a team of engineers was sent to extract the hull. A Bradly was struck by another giant IED killing two Soldiers, leaving the hull on an island. With the blast hole from the IED that hit the Husky separating the road in front of it and the blast hole from the IED that hit the Bradly severing the road on the other side. My good buddy LT Pete never did forgive me for melting down the best Husky in the fleet, that we borrowed from him, to a pile of molten metal.
   

Hours later I called over the radio for an update on Privet Hanson. “Battle Main, Wolf, over”  
“Wolf, Battle Main”  
“Looking for an update on my Soldier who was MEDEVACed, over”  
“Wait one,” I guessed they wouldn’t know just how bad he was but that they would be able to tell me he was on his way to Germany or the States or something.  
“Wolf, Battle Main”  
“Battle Main, Wolf, send it”  
“He’s RTD, over”  
“Say again, over”  
“I say again, That Soldier is returned to duty”  
I paused… “Battle Main this is Wolf, the route clearance team, we had a Soldier hit by a huge IED that was MEDEVACed a couple hours ago. I highly doubt he will return to duty any time soon.”  
After a long pause on the net, during which I figured he would get his facts straight, he replied “Wolf, I have battle roster number K1134”  
“That’s him, over”  
“RTD, Wolf , over”  
I couldn’t believe it. I was amazed he was alive let alone returned to duty by the medics.  
   
It would be less than a week later that PVT Hansen got back behind the wheel of a Husky. As we traversed down route gnat PVT Hansen’s vehicle was struck by an IED. It was a relatively small explosion. PVT Hansen almost immediately got on the radio and reported “I’m ok” in a discussed voice that in just two words described how rattled he was about being hit again. I
    
Kevin Improvised Explosive Devises (IED) detonated on PVT Hansen's vehicle at least 6 documented times along with at least one documented explosion from a rocket propelled grenade (RPG) during his nearly 100 documented combat patrols. None of these incidences resulted in the report of an injury, in part due to the culture of his Platoon at the time of the deployment. Soldiers were expected to "man up" and "walk off" having their "bell rung" and self-medicate for headaches from blasts. Soldiers in his platoon went so far as to memorize the answers to the Military Acute Concussion Evaluation, or MACE test, in order to continue on patrols rather than be removed from missions.
 
On 18 June 2007 an enormous 500 pound IED exploded directly under the one man "Husky" vehicle PVT Hansen was operating, rendering him unconscious. The vehicle was a total battle loss with no recognizable pieces remaining with the acceptation of the capsule immediately around where PVT Hansen sat. Two Army Soldiers died when their Abrams tank was struck by a similar device in route to secure the site of the blast that hit PVT Hansen. Two additional Soldiers died when their Bradly Fighting Vehicle was also struck by a similar device in route to recover the vehicle wreckage. Four Soldiers died in armored vehicles from similar blasts on the same road, on the same day, while PVT Hansen down-played the event, walked it off, as he saw his leaders and peers do numerous times before, and returned to his job ,out of a sense of honor and duty to his platoon.
 
Immediately following the attach PVT Hansen was casevac'd to a landing zone where a medevac helicopter took him to a medical facility. His home unit did not have a copy of that medical record because, at the time, PVT Hansen's platoon had been placed under operational control of the active duty, 1-30 BN, under the 3rd infantry division, and administrative control of the Arkansas National Guard, while his Army Reserve company and battalion were located 100 miles away in Ramadi, Iraq.   A few days later PVT Hansen was behind the wheel of another Husky, which was struck directly by an IED. The cumulative effect of multiple blasts in a short time did not deter PVT Hansen from returning to the mission as soon as that vehicle was repaired.
 
The culture of 2nd Platoon, B Company, 321st Engineer Battalion lead directly Kevin Hansen not receiving a deserved Purple Heart Award. I, as the Leader, of that platoon, am personally responsible for that culture and hope to make it right by writing this statement and assisting Kevin Hansen in receiving the recognition he deserves. Most importantly I hope this statement assists Mr. Hansen is receiving the necessary medical treatment he needs from injuries received in the Line of Duty and is exceptional service to his Nation.
      

Letter from Hanson