**Chapter Three: In The Army Now**  
One thing that has come to define much of who I am is my service in the United States Army Reserve. As I remember it, my best friend Erik Kendall showed up to school one day with an Army T-shirt on. Of course, I made fun of him and asked, “What, did you join the Army and for signing your life away they gave you this cheap mass produced lousy T-shirt?” His diverted gaze and serious face told me that was exactly the case. The joking stopped. “You really joined the Army?” I asked seriously. He nodded to affirm. “Why?” I objected. He had never mentioned this was his plan. I was shocked.  
"Well, I know I want to go the college and I know my parents can't afford to help me. I don't play any sports, so I'm not getting a sports scholarship. My grades aren't that good, certainly not good enough for an academic scholarship. I don't want to go tens of thousands of dollars in debt. The Army says they will pay for me to go to school…" he trailed off a bit, or maybe I stopped listening. Erik and I had a lot in common. We both liked learning, especially science. To be clear, that did not mean we necessarily liked school nor were we particularly good at it. Though he had much more of an aptitude than I did. I recall several projects where I clung tightly to his preverbal coat tails while we engineered our way through some rowdy activities in the name of science. I was not the brains nor the muscle behind some very impressive mouse trap powered cars. But I had contributed some persuasion skills to convince a local saddle bag maker to give us some scrap material to build a water balloon launcher. Then I, some how, helped convince the home economics teacher, Mrs. Dent, to allow us to use her sewing machine to sew the pouch and handle. It wasn’t pretty but it held long enough to launch several voiles across the schoolyard and across the street. We were the coolest kids in school for a hot five seconds until we broke the windshield out of Wes Woodward’s car. Fortunately no one got hurt. We still felt horrible. His dad was upset but super understanding. We had been surprisingly less destructive with the trebuchet and the fireworks we built. Yup, we made fireworks, in school, for a grade. To be fair, the fire department was there, along with the whole town for the homecoming football game. We did have a few terrifying premature explosions on the launch pad and a few, even more heart stopping shots, that went all the way up and all the way back to earth before bursting in a ball of brightly colored burning metal and fire. Guess those guys failed to properly calculate the rate of the gravitational pull compared to the fuse burn rate. Hey, it’s high school chemistry and physics in a small farm town. Not one of us was bound for MIT. But our science teacher, Mr. Warham, will go down as a legend. It was a different time and place for sure. As much fun as we had, we did do some learning. But learning and grades don’t always equate to the same thing, and I, like Erik, didn’t have the grades for an academic scholarship nor the means to pay for it any more than he did. My astute amigo had presented a pretty compelling argument for military service. As he ran though the rational he used to make this extraordinary decision, the reality that I was in very much the same situation sat hard with me and I knew then that I would join the Army. I had played Soldier games as a kid. I loved my country. I had a family history of Soldiers, Sailors, Marines, and Airman, including my name sake, that I respected and admired, but at that time, my reason for joining was purely an attempt to invest in a better future for myself. I should have asked more questions, and done more research, but I didn’t know what questions to ask, or who to ask them to, so I went with what I knew. I asked only one question and made only one request. “Can I be released for two years to serve a mission for my church”, was my only question. “I want to be with my buddy Erik”, was my only request.  
"Yes, you can go into the inactive ready reserve (IRR) for two years." And "Yes, we can make you a truck driver and you can be in the same unit as your buddy." They gave me the two things I had asked for, I didn't know what else to ask, so I signed up.  
While this chosen profession defines so much of who I have become, it didn’t come as the career I envisioned myself pursuing in my life. And so it may be true with the people in your organization. They are rarely there because that’s what they wanted to “be” when they grew up. Most of us “fall” into our circumstances. Based on the options before us, we make what we think are the best choices at the time.  
==Understanding why someone is in the position they are in can be a very powerful insight.== They may be right where they want to be or you may be able to help them use where they are to get to where they want to go. Either way, even when I haven’t ended up where I thought I wanted to be, I have been grateful for the journey that got me there and I am grateful to be where I am.  
If you expect the people in your charge to stay in the role they are in for more than a couple years you are probably going to be surprised. If you anticipate being in your current position for more than the next 5 years you will likely be surprised again. Train yourself, train your replacement, and your team, create continuity files, and prepare your organization for the day when you and others will move on.  
Another important note is that ==inexperience is not incompetence==. We often overestimate experience and underestimate ability. Asking the right questions leads to good decisions. But inexperience often means not knowing what to ask…. So ==start asking questions== and smart people will lead you to know what you didn't know, you didn't know.
 
Six days after high school graduation I found myself on an airplane on my way to Fort Leonard Wood, MO, for Basic Combat Training. After landing at the Saint Louis Airport and reporting to the USO where I waited for a long bus ride; arriving finally late at night to yelling drill sergeants "welcoming" us to the Army. The first day “down range” was one big show. Drill sergeants from all the companies around came to join in the festivities. There were all kinds of activities that included running around and around the building and not stepping on the grass. Those who stopped running were instantly swarmed by drill sergeants, like a pack of wolfs preying on a wounded deer. I just kept on running. I ran cross-country a little in high school and while I was not fast I had the stamina and the sense that this was not the place for a stroll. The drill sergeants quickly establish themselves as, in charge and not to be messed with. After surviving the initial barrage of drill sergeant vultures, we lined up in front of the building, each of us taking a side walk square. Then we dumped the contents of all we had with us on the cement and inventoried our stuff. Any civilian attire, electronics, candy, luxury, and any "contraband" of any kind, we would not see for a while. It was placed in a bag and locked in a room not to be seen until this chapter of life was over. Notes were made about who would need shoes, soap, razors, and any other deficiencies. We all then marched to the Post Exchange to acquire any missing items. I had been pretty diligent in packing everything on the required packing list and not packing anything extra. Packing for Boy Scout campouts and learning to follow instructions early would serve me well. I stood patiently outside in the newly learned lines and columns of the formation while those who needed things went inside. I stood on the far left column of the formation about five rows from the front. The formation angled in such a way that I could look forward and just to the left side of the head of the person in front of me and have a clear view of my drill sergeant standing, arms folded, just outside the door to the exchange. As I watched him pacing back and forth I thought how grouchy he looked. Then, as if on cue, someone came running out the door of the Exchange and ran right into him, nearly knocking him over. An audible gasp could be heard from everyone who saw. I thought we were all being pretty quiet waiting outside, but the silence suddenly became tangible. I’m certain I saw steam coming from the Drill Sergeant’s ears. “Get down and beat your face!” yelled a drill sergeant, clearly lost for any other words. The look on the face of the offender demonstrated that he was as confused as I was about what the drill sergeant wanted him to do. “Push the earth… knock ‘em out… smoke yourself… DO PUSH-UPS PRIVET!” The drill sergeant screamed. The privet suddenly realized that all those expressions meant one thing. He got down and quickly began the exercise. I was surprised when after only a couple repetitions the drill sergeant barked “Get up!” to which the privet responded by quickly jumping to his feet and snapping to the position of attention; the one thing he had learned so far. “You get up in the morning.” the drill sergeant said with a scowl. “Get back down”. The privet, slightly confused, immediately returned to the ground and began the push-ups again. “Recover!” the drill sergeant instructed. Again the privet sprang to his feet. “You recover in a hospital, get back dooown” the drill sergeant stretched out the word dooown, and this time the corner of his mouth turn up ever so slightly. He was enjoying himself. The privet had no sooner gotten down to do push-ups again when the drill sergeant demanded, “get up”. To which he again scrambled to his feet. “You get up in the morning, get back down.” The privet was clearly confused as to what he should do, but he did as he was directed and got down only to be told to “Recover” as soon as he got close to performing the first push-up. By that time, I was amused. This was entertaining. I wondered how long would this go on and how long it would be before he just stayed down. I smiled a broad smile and even chuckled to myself feeling a little sorry for the kid who had crossed the path of my drill sergeant. As I stood at the far left of the formation watching this poor kid get up and get back down, suddenly a giant head filled my entire view. A hard rimmed brown hat touched just above the bridge of my nose. “You think this is funny?” He screamed, his face so close to mine, his mouth so big I thought he would swallow me whole. All happy feelings were suddenly gone. I felt my stomach in my feet and in my throat. I had been caught laughing at the scene before me and I knew it. “You think this is funny privet?” he yelled again, inches from my face.  
“I _did_ think it was funny, drill sergeant” I replied emphasizing the “did” to make sure I wasn’t lying about what I had so obviously been caught laughing at, but to indicate that it defiantly wasn’t funny anymore.  
“Sergeant Shearer we got a privet over here, ‘ thinks this is funny.” He turned back to me. “What platoon are you in privet ….Sparrow?” he asked cocking his head to one side and reading my name tag.  
“Third Platoon, drill sergeant” I replied crisply.  
"Oh, h#!! no.” he said shaking his head, “Sergeant Shearer we got one of _YOUR_ privets over here, ‘ thinks you’re funny.”  
“Get out’a here” my drill sergeant said, motioning with his hand without looking down at the kid on the ground. The previous victim wasted no time, clearly relived to have any reason to disappear. “Come here Privet. You obviously think this looks like fun and you want a turn.” He said mockingly. Then his voice turned stern “Beat your face!” he demanded. At this point I had no confusion about what to do. I hit the ground and started knocking them out. “Get up”, the drill sergeant snapped.  
“You get up in the morning, drill serGEANT.” I replied loudly emphasizing the end of the word, having thought about what I would do if I were the one on ground, not realizing I would get the chance so quickly. He let me do a few more push-ups and then said in a nice voice trying to catch me.  
“Ok, Privet you can recover.”  
“You recover in a hospital drill serGEANT,” I yelled so pleased with myself for not falling for his tricks and playing the game by his rules. I continued the push-ups quite proud of myself. The drill Sargent stared at me for a moment while I did a few more pushups. Then came the command “roll over privet!”  
”Roll?” I thought to myself. I don’t know how to respond to that.  
“ROLL OVER YOU!” The drill sergeant screamed. I thought as quickly as I could.  
“You only roll… if you’re a dog, drill serGEANT” I stammered through the first thing I could think of and tried to say it with confidence. As I mulled over in my head if what I just said was going to work, the drill sergeant came back quickly,  
“you are a dog. Now roll over, dog!” I had no response to that. I shrugged my shoulders and started rolling around on the ground. I rolled back and forth, not sure how rolling was much of a punishment but did not complain. The drill sergeant had apparently wanted me to simply roll onto my back to do other exercises, such as flutter kicks, clearly seeing that the push-ups were not tiring me as quickly as he desired. But he was now quite amused, as were the other drill sergeants laughing and pointing as I rolled around. Then an idea occurred to me. I rolled right down the stairs, down the sidewalk, and right on out of there. When I thought I had rolled far enough, I rolled a little farther just to be sure. Then jumped up and discreetly moved back into the formations of other Soldiers all in the same uniform, finding my way back to my platoon where I blended in. The drill sergeants had found some other Privet deserving of their attention. And I was as happy to be off the radar as the guy before me.  
==Learn quickly. If you’re not learning from other’s mistakes, you are bound to repeat them.==  
==Don’t take yourself too seriously.== Even the sternest of people often have a heart in there somewhere. Mocking and joking are not appropriate in all situations. Disrespect is never appropriate, but keeping a positive lighthearted attitude can get you through the toughest of situations.  
==It also doesn’t hurt to have some confidence and grit.==
 
As I’m sure happens in a lot of venues where boys are put together for any period of time, I’m thinking “Lord of the Flies”, many "boys" at basic training felt the need to establish some kind of male dominance pecking order. One morning, likely a Sunday as that was the day we were left for a few moments without hovering adult supervision, bunks were pushed out of the way to clear a space for fighting, well wrestling as that seemed more tolerable. I had wrestled for a short time in junior high school. Maybe saying “I wrestled” is giving myself too much credit. I never won a match. I’m not even sure if I ever scored a point. I generally spent most of the match with my face shoved into the mat trying to keep from being pinned. but I watched enough WWF (WWE) that I knew, should a miracle occur and I ever found myself as more than face rash bait, the cradle would be my signature finishing move. This is done by hooking one arm around the opponents leg, usually behind the knee, while the other arm hooks around the back of the neck. Hands are lock together while the rest of the body drives the opponent’s shoulders to the mat. It adds meaning to the phase ”balling someone up”, and I was going to do it… In my dreams… maybe.  
I had no need, nor desire, at that time to find out where I stacked up in manly merit. I was perfectly content to be put at the bottom of the list, by default, for not even trying. I didn’t even care to watch. I simply wanted to enjoy time without drill sergeants yelling at me, rather than be associated with the certain punishment that would follow if the drill sergeant walking in on what he would certainly be consider a fight in the middle of the bay. I laid on my bunk and read my book and dosed a bit, a rare luxury I was not willing to pass on. I was suddenly torn from dreams of better places when someone discovered my hide out. “Sparrow, you haven’t wrestled yet.” someone observed.  
”Come on Sparrow,“ others encouraged.  
”You should wrestle Lennon,” came a suggestion. The encouragements to join the fray turned to taunting that appeared would not stop until I wrestled someone. Then Privet Philips blurted  
“ya, come on Sparrow 'you scared.”  
“Fine,” I thought, “If I’m going to get crushed, I might as well get eaten by the biggest guy in the room”. I had heard said somewhere, that you should never pick a fight with the smallest kid. Even if you win, you still look like a loser for fighting with the smallest guy. Worse, if you lose you will never live down being beaten by the runt. In contrast, if you fight the biggest guy and lose, no big deal, that was to be expected, you don’t lose any credibility. In fact, the likely outcome is that you gain some respect for having the guts to go toe to toe with the brut. Plus, should the off chance occur that you actually win, you will gain status instantly, even if the big guy has no skills. “Alright Philips,” I said “I’ll take you”. I took off my blouse and hung it on the end of the bunk. I made my way past knees sticking out from bunks and Soldiers sitting on the floor to the inside of the circle of gathered spectators. Many who had been less interested in previous contests suddenly paused conversations to see the skinny kid from Idaho get pummeled by this monster. As I stared at him I knew my only chance was be to be fast. I would shoot for his legs and at least get points for a takedown before my face was inevitably smashed into the polished concrete floor. I glanced at the tree trunks that supported his frame. Even if I could get my arms around them I couldn’t lift them. It was too late to devise anything different.  
”Shake hands” the self-proclaimed officiator directed. He grabbed my hand and squeezed unnecessarily long and hard, probably to intimidate me. If so, it was working. I pulled away, not because of the pain, although that would have been a good enough reason, but because if I waited any longer I would chicken out. It was now or never. Our hands released signaling the start of the match. I sprang at him like a young lion on an unsuspecting full grown water buffalo. I wrapped my arms around his legs. I struggled the get my hands to touch. Immediately sensing that it was futile, I drove my shoulder into his hips. My face disappeared into his soft pudgy waist. I dug my legs like a lineman clearing a path for a running back coming from the back field. Slowly, maybe even in true slow motion, Goliath lost balance from the surprise attack and fell like a giant redwood. His head smacked the hard floor with such force that my head ached sympathetically.  
“Oooohhh,” the crowd chorused. I, of course, knew only one finishing move. I spun around putting my back on his chest. I reached around his neck, my right arm not coming out the other side for its thickness. With the other arm I reached down for one leg. I could barely get my hand behind his leg and couldn’t even lift it off the ground . It wasn’t a cradle at all. Mostly I just to laid on top of him, my back to his chest, with my arms stretched out.  
”One, Two, Three”, the officiator counted excitedly slapping the floor with each number. He raised my own hand in victory. I made one fist pump then slinked off, breathing hard, knowing better than anyone in the room how lucky I had been. I avoided eye contact and the high-fives from other privets. I brushed off the complaints from Philips that the fight had been unfair, and demands for a rematch. I ignored the challenges from other potential competitors.  
Everyone was fixated on the upset of the day that had just taken place, but I was not interested in gloating or ruining the outcome in any way. My mind carried me to a place and time far away, to a story my dad told me once about my Grandpa Francis. In his own words my dad wrote:  
Many of the Francis family had gathered at our home to visit. Our little house was getting crowded when I suggested that we go shoot some skeet. We gathered up clay pigeons, shells and guns. As often happens, male egos began to announce great skill and over confidence. Grandpa said little but was obviously following the conversations with amusement. Grandpa's Sons shot, the Son-in-laws shot. Excuses were made. Teasing comments followed each missed shot. It was Grandpa's turn. It had been years since he had hunted or even had a shotgun in his hands. I handed him my Remington Wing-master loaded and ready. He took position and called "PULL!" The clay sprang straight out gathering a bit of elevation... BANG! The clay shattered with an obvious direct to center hit. Well anyone can hit the easy straight out ones ...right... "PULL!" He called again. This time out to the left and jumping skyward the clay soared... BANG! The clay turned to dust. Well two for two, not bad for an old guy who hasn't shot for decades... "PULL!" This time right 45 degrees low and fast...BANG! The clay disappeared into innumerable pieces. 3 for 3, 100%. Grandpa handed me back my shotgun as the “atta-boys” erupted as well as the  
“lucky shot” comments,  
“you'll never do that again”,  
“bet you can't do that again” was said over and over. I quickly loaded another 3 shells and holding my shotgun out towards Grandpa Francis I said  
"I want to see that again." The reply came back firm and resolved.  
"No, I think I have proved myself." And he had! No amount of encouraging changed his mind. He said little but he did say that it appeared to him that we were the ones that needed the practice. What would have happened with the next three shots? No one will ever know. But what I do know is Grandpa Francis was a great shot and he knew when he had made his point indisputably perfect.  
Like Kenny Rogers says “You've got to know when to hold 'em, know when to fold 'em, ==know when to walk away==, and know when to run. You never count your money when you're sittin' at the table. There'll be time enough for countin' when the dealin's done.”
 
The thing I struggled with the most at Basic was not the physical or mental challenges. I struggled most with people who could not follow directions. Too many times I recall sitting in an empty room after our drill sergeant gave specific instructions to “clean weapons and be quiet.” Whispering would start, which escalated to quite talking. Then shushing would follow, followed by the shushing of the shushers. Egos got in the way of reason, and arguments ignited over who should “shut up” and who couldn’t tell who to “shut up”.  
"Shhhhhh."  
"you shhhhh" ”I don't have to shhhhh.”  
”You don't tell me what to do." The drill sergeant would return, make us all do push-ups, then leave with the same instructions as before,  
“clean weapons and be quiet”. As soon as he left, the fighting would commence again.  
“We wouldn’t get smoked if you would stop talking”.  
“You stop talking”.  
“Why don’t you both stop talking” a third party would chime in.  
“Why don’t you butt out”.  
"Why don't you shut up"… It was almost a relief when the drill sergeant would come in again and we would exercise until we couldn’t possibly move any part of our bodies anymore. Then he would leave and it would start all over again.  
Egos and selfishness sometimes overrule reason and sound judgment. ==You cannot allow pride to affect your decisions.== If you do, you will inevitably make poor decisions. You also cannot have a culture of selfishness in a successful organization. Competition? Yes! But when people feel the need to save face despite negative consequences they make rash choices and tear teams apart.  
One person that never seemed to stop talking was Privet Simmons. With the last name “Sparrow”, I stood right behind PVT Simmons in every line. He would tell me all about his pearl-white Volkswagen Beatle with royal purple shag interior. He went on and on in such detail that I still remember 30 years later. He had participated in JROTC in high school and thought himself to be an expert of all things Army. I was constantly in trouble because Simmons was constantly turned around talking to me.  
Toward the end of Basic Combat Training, while conducting our field training exercise, the company sat on the outside of a bend in a dry river bed. On the opposite bank our company commander stood talking. The grassy slope curved around perfectly into a natural, miniature amphitheater. The raised bank on the other side made for a natural stage. This was the company’s new commander, not that I had seen the old commander more than once. He was giving some “Hooah” speech that I was less than interested in. - In the Army it is customary to say “Hooah” as a response. Some argue that “Hooah” is actually ”H-U-A”, and like most things in the Army, it is an acronym which stands for Heard Understood and Acknowledged. Whatever it means, it can be somewhat motivating at times but mostly becomes droning and mindless. This commander seemed to prefer "Check" as a replacement to the traditional "Hooah" and was saying “Check” after every sentence; to which we responded with “Check, Sir”.  
As I sat thinking more about saying “Check” verses “Hooah” than about what was being said, I got the sense that something wasn’t right. All was quiet, too quiet, and although I had heard my share of boring speeches in my life, this one seemed to be dragging out intentionally. He seemed to be stalling for something. I felt uneasy, and while the cool grass invited me to lounge on one elbow as the rest of the Soldiers did, I sat ridged looking around. As I observed, I noticed the drill sergeants in the back passing each other and shooting glances that said to me that something was definitely up but that they were trying to be discrete about it. I elbowed my battle buddy PVT Lennon and signaled to him that something was off, I’m not sure he understood but sat up as well. Then I heard it, a sharp pop followed by a loud hiss; the distinct sound of a CS canister. I reacted without thought. I opened my M40 protective mask case on my left hip with my left hand. I reached in with my right hand and grabbed it firmly. My chin went into the chin rest. My left hand came up to pull the straps tightly onto my head. With my right hand I cleared and sealed the mask. The Army standard to do this is nine seconds. It took me less than four. But now I was certain that I failed… and died. It was completely black and I wasn’t breathing. The first step to dawning the M40 protective mask is to close your eyes and hold your breath, which I was still doing. “Breath!” I told myself. I gasped a first breath. I was alive, but I was still confused by the darkness. “My eyes are closed,” I finally acknowledged to myself. I opened my eyes, but to my surprise it was still dark. Then I felt the distinct burn on the back of my neck where the CS gas began to react with the sweat on my skin. “My hood!” I suddenly realized, was still over the front of my mask. I pulled it over my head and looked out for the first time. I immediately looked to my left to where my battle buddy, PVT Lennon, had been sitting next to me. He looked at me in that same instant having situated his mask simultaneously with me. “Are you good” I asked, muffled through the mask, showing him a questioning thumbs-up. He returned the thumbs-up gesture and muffled through his mask  
“I’m good. Are you good?”  
“I’m good,” I said shaking my thumbs-up hand to emphasize.  
“Good.” He repeated shaking his thumbs-up as we stared at each other. Then slowly my focus shifted past my comrade to what was happening beyond him and all around us. It looked like children were let loose in a hen house and were trying to catch chickens. PVT Lennon and I seemed to be the only two people still sitting and not running around franticly. The scene reminded me of a clip from a cartoon. I watched as one Soldier disoriented, eyes blurred from the gas, and panicked, ran straight on into a large tree. He fell hard on his back, scrambled to his feet again, and ran off into the woods bouncing off trees like a pin ball and out of sight. I watched a female soldier throw the crutches she had hobbled around with and run into the woods in another direction. I watched two people literally run right into each other, both falling backwards and onto their back sides on the ground. “This is crazy,” I thought “It’s like a ridiculous play I’m watching.”  
Then, as if on queue, I saw PVT Simmons run in from stage right. He stopped center stage, right on the spot where the commander had stood speaking moments before. “Where did that guy go”, I wondered. Simmons was coughing and hacking. As he stood there he reached for and struggled with his mask. He tried to put it on but the effects of the gas had already overcome him. He looked as though he would throw up. Then the mask was on his face. But it was too late. I could see his face clearly, as he looked directly at me through the mask lenses in panic. His eyes grew wide. His body contracted. Then, vomit filled the lower half of his mask, up passed his nose. He couldn’t breathe. His body convulsed. I could see his eyes just over the slurry. They pleaded with me for help. There was nothing I could do but watch. His body trembled like a volcano rumbling before an eruption. His eyes grew wider and then, suddenly, disappeared as he vomited again filling the entire mask. He flopped and twitched and tore the mask from his face, gasping for breath; then finally breathing in deep, forcing gas into his already burning lungs. He bent over throwing up again and again. He tried to run. He stumbled a few steps, vomited, ran a few more, stopped briefly to bend over and vomit again. As he disappeared into the woods I imagined the burning of his face as the gas reacted to the wet mess that was all over him. I couldn’t dwell long. As I turned to my right I saw a drill sergeant approaching fast. I prepared myself for an encounter, seeing him coming towards me and not yet understanding why. Then it became crystal clear. In the panic and chaos Soldier’s gear was strung across the area. Helmets, masks, cases, weapons, and anything he could see, he was after it. I suddenly felt a need to protect it. I began grabbing everything I could get my hands on. PVT Lennon saw what was happening and quickly joined the race. The drill sergeant saw me, he saw what I was doing, and he began working faster. We moved towards each other both determined to get as much stuff as we could. Both with arms full, clinging to straps, scrambling. Then it looked as though we would reach the same last weapon at the same time. I reached out and grabbed it the instant before he did, but his hand was on it. I clung tightly determined to save whoever the owner was from certain destruction at the hand of the drill sergeant. He looked hard at me. Noting my determination he released it with a shove and moved on in search of treasure elsewhere. I couldn’t carry more stuff if I found it. I looked at Lennon who had also collected more than he could comfortably carry. The sun was setting and people were gathering back together. Many covered in vomit looked exhausted and glad the ordeal was finally over. Others held expressions of horror about losing gear. Word got out that Sparrow and Lennon had collected a bunch of stuff. A line formed and many cheered and hugged us as they got their things back. One poor sole at the end of the line was devastated to learn that we did not have his weapon. Then he heard his weapon number being called out by the drill sergeant. He hung his head and slowly moved that direction, not wanting to face the consequences of leaving his weapon. I felt bad for those who faired so poorly through the ordeal. At the same time I couldn’t help but feel proud of the way my battle buddy and I had reacted. I saw Simons still wet from his own fluids. He looked drained. I felt bad for him too, but I couldn’t help but feel somewhat vindicated. I smiled, I knew I shouldn’t, but THAT was the funniest thing I had ever seen in real life. Basic training was almost at its end and Simmons didn't have many more opportunities to turn around and get us both in hot water but when he did, I had only to remind him of standing in the middle of that clearing and throwing up in his mask. “Remember that time?” He didn't want to talk about it. And that kept him quiet.  
==Lessons learned: 1-Learn your job to the point that it becomes second nature. Plan for the crisis so that when it comes you are prepared and even surprise yourself by how well you react. 2- Be vigilant. 3- Trust your gut about things that don’t seem right. 4- Help other people, even if you don’t have to. Helping others leads to mutual help. Call it Karma or whatever you want to call it. Helping others always returns good works to you. Karma works in the other way too. The deserving eventually get what they deserve.==  
One of the first things people noticed about me at basic training was the way I talked. Bobby Little, from Boston (whose name backwards is Little, Bobby), and Privet Young from Mississippi (who had no rhythm and could not march) had more distinct accents but it was more about what I didn’t say than what I did say. I didn’t tell dirty jokes or use foul language. Many Soldiers asked me why I didn’t; arguing that they are “just words” and that “it doesn’t matter”. I didn’t argue. I agreed. They are just words, and I _just chose_ not to use them. When I began my Advanced Individual Training some of the guys that went with me to basic training joined me. I remember vividly the first Sunday morning at AIT. I heard from across the bay “SPARROW WHAT?!”, “WHERE IS HE?”, “SPARROW!” PVT Drummond, a giant black guy, came into view as I moved to the center of the room. I saw that he brought company, all the people he had established as his pose over the first few days of being there. The rest of the bay of 60 people gathered around to see what was going on. I didn’t know what he wanted but he sounded angry. “You Sparrow?” he glared at me. “Yep,” I said as cheerful as I dared. “Green tells me you don’t G*^ D@#& swear.” “Nope,” I replied, again as cheerfully as I thought I could get away with. PVT Drummond spent what seemed like an eternity swearing words that I had never heard, and describing in the most disgusting way how little he thought of me. Then he stopped, looked hard at me, and walked away. The crowd dispersed murmuring. I went back to what I was doing, confused about what had just happened and why. I sent one up that I was still breathing out of my face and not a hole in my chest. Then I didn’t think much more about it.  
A few weeks later I stood in a formation with my platoon. The drill sergeants gave us instructions, as they always did, to stand still and not talk. I thought they were simple instructions, but the same meat head that never understood that “don’t talk” meant “don’t open and close your mouth while vibrating your vocal cords”, started trying to be funny and telling dirty jokes. I turned and looked at him and boldly said “shut up”. (Did I mention PVT Jones weighed in around 2 “fity” at 6’ 3”, dwarfing my 5’ 10” 145lbs with my rucksack on?) “What did you say to me?” he said shocked. I immediately regretted my approach. I had probably been too harsh, but I had already committed. “You heard what I said,’ Shut Up!’” I looked at him, “I am tired of getting smoked because you can’t keep your mouth shut and stand still.” In the Army, especially during entry level training, group punishment is the norm. If one person is out of line, everyone pays. This guy had caused us all to do any number of strenuous exercises, known as “getting smoked”, on multiple occasions for not holding his tongue. The conversation ended quickly as the drill sergeants returned. When the formation ended, I went to my bunk quickly followed by PVT Jones and the rest of the platoon. “Do you want to fight me, Sparrow?” he scowled looking down at me and puffing out his chest. I looked up and calmly replied. “No, I don’t want to fight you. It wouldn’t be much of a fight. You would crush me.” I hesitated, then determined that I was already in this and continued. ”I am just sick and tired of getting smoked because you can’t shut your mouth in formation.”  
“You’re just weak and can’t hack it,” he retorted. “I can do the push-ups,” I told him, “I can do the exercises. I just don’t want to have to, and we wouldn’t have to, if we would all just do what we’re supposed to do, and keep quiet in formation.” I knew at any minute this guy was going to feed me my teeth. I had visions of blacking out and waking up on the floor. Then something unexpected happened. PVT Drummond stepped between us. “Come on Jones. You just can’t talk sense into this guy,” and he pushed him away. Nothing more was ever said to me about either of those incidences. But I was again grateful to have the same number of holes in my face, and Jones did tone it down a bit.  
There was another Soldier of my faith in 44 Truck, PVT Johnson. He tried hard to fit in and make friends. He relaxed his standards. No, he didn’t do anything unconscionable, or even pick up any addictive habits. He just decided to use foul language and laugh at the off colored jokes. What happened surprised me. I became a person who was respected and admired for having principals and living by them. PVT Johnson became a laughing stock; mocked for having no discipline or backbone to follow what he claimed to be right.  
I don’t know that this is worth much more than a good story for anyone else. But for me it represents more than a story. It represents who I am. I couldn’t swear now if I wanted to. I used the word “pissed” to describe how upset I was in an email I sent once and I lost a little respect from the some of the foulest mouthed people. Probably writing it here got a rise, or maybe a chuckle, from a few of you. But for some, who have never heard me say it, I may have even lost a little credibility. I have a reputation to uphold. I am respected for having discipline and control of myself, including my tongue.  
Where does this leave me as a leader? No, I don’t have a swearing jar, nor am I advocating for it. I don’t point my finger at anyone and call them a heathen, that's not helpful and would only make me look arrogant. They just know that I don’t talk like that. Have I heard crude things said that I thought were funny? Sure. Do I respect and admire people who also cuss? Absolutely. My grandpa had a farmer’s tongue. I’m in the military and a combat veteran. I expect to hear Soldier and Sailor words, but I do not tolerate racial or sexual comments no matter how sarcastic or humorous they are meant to be. There is no room for bigotry on a team. Eliminating offensive language and degrading comments from the work place makes it an environment people want to work in. ==Demonstrating discipline earns respect and leads to disciplined followers.==  
After Basic Training I went home for a few months and began a job at Icon Health and Fitness making treadmills on a production line. I worked on a team with one other person. She would start the treadmill for the first time, checking functionality. I would put on the back roller and then adjust the belt. It was at my station that any issues with the machine were often discovered for the first time. When something had a problem, the machine was moved off the production line and onto the “mechanics loop”. The mechanic would fix the issue and move it back onto the line or assemble the machine alone before sending it through the quality control booth. I quickly learned that I could fix many of the issues myself without sending the half assembled machine off to be someone else's problem. I also discovered that by doing so I could save a lot of time in the production process. I found, for example, that if a bad batch of circuit boards were put into the treadmills that the workers putting in circuit boards simply continued to put them on and it took a long time before the problem was finally cut off at the source. If I identified the issue, I could stop bad circuit boards from being put in, quickly change out those already on the line and keep production running. My line leaders saw in me an ability to work independently and when a position came available to bring parts to the line I was offered the parts puller job. I enjoyed very much being off the grind of the line. I also made a few more cents an hour, a big perk for me as I was working to save money. With me off the production line, the mechanic became inundated with machines. No one was willing to step outside of their wrote production script. When he became overwhelmed and quit I was offered his position. I was initially reluctant but found that I could be bought for a few more cents an hour. I simply trained a few key people on the line what things to watch out for and empowered them to fix the issues before they got to me. Things ran so smoothly that I started assisting where there were bottle necks on the line. I didn’t do all of this unselfishly. Although I do enjoy helping others and fixing processes; we worked for piece rate. That meant that the more treadmills we made in a night, the more money we made. With the production line running smooth and everyone energized to make more money, quality control seemed to be the greatest hold up. So, I again was offered a few more cents an hour to work QC. Then after only a few short months, I got to be a lead in charge of a couple people for a special project. I don’t recall exactly what the circumstances were but I do remember one of the people on my team thinking I was too harsh and crying. When the project we were working on ended I went back to quality control and was not asked to continue in a lead position. I enjoyed my job and continued to make good money for me and the team.  
I learned many lessons from this experience ==1- Seek for ways to help the team. Similar to the lesson form a previous story about helping individuals, Look outside of what you are doing to make the organization better. Often times you will be rewarded for your efforts. 2- As a leader, look for those who can make your team or organization better and put them in positions to do so, which may include a promotion. 3- Some people are born leaders, others have to work at it. Either way there are skills and attributes that can be learned. Otherwise books like this one would be useless. I clearly had to work at it. I had the potential. Which I recognize in myself as I look back and think about how I influenced others. But leading is more than motivating. 4- (this lesson came up again) not everyone is ready now but it does not preclude them from being ready later, especially with training or experience. 5- People are often promoted one level higher than their capability. Great workers do not always great leaders make. Give yourself some wiggle room to test those you promote and don’t be afraid to put them back to doing something they are good at or finding ways to use their skills in conventional ways and to reward in unconventional ways. Promotions don’t have to mean being in charge of more people.==